The Project Gutenberg EBook of Undine, by Friedrich de la Motte Fouquée

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Undine

Author: Friedrich de la Motte Fouquée

Editor: Mary Macgregor

Illustrator: Katharine Cameron

Release Date: July 4, 2006 [EBook #18752]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNDINE ***




Produced by Jason Isbell, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                     TOLD TO THE CHILDREN SERIES

                       EDITED BY LOUEY CHISHOLM


       [Illustration: On the threshold stood a little maiden.]




                    Friedrich de la Motte Fouquée


                                UNDINE


                       TOLD TO THE CHILDREN BY

                            MARY MACGREGOR


                           WITH PICTURES BY

                          KATHARINE CAMERON




                     LONDON: T. C. & E. C. JACK

                     NEW YORK: E. P. DUTTON & CO.




       *       *       *       *       *

TO MARGARET

       *       *       *       *       *




ABOUT THIS BOOK

Undine is the name of the water maiden whose story you will read as
you turn the leaves of this little book.

Undine is beautiful as the dawn stealing across the waters, beautiful
as the spray of the crystal waves.

Yet when she comes to earth she comes to seek for that without which
her beauty will be for ever cold, cold and chill as the surge of the
salt, salt sea.

Look deep into her blue eyes and you will see why her beauty is so
cold, so chill.

In the eyes of every mortal you may see a soul. In the gay blue eyes
of Undine, look you long and never so deep, no soul will look forth to
meet your gaze.

Love, joy, sorrow, these are the pearls that shine in the eyes of
every mortal. But in the eyes of the water maiden there is no gleam
of love, no sparkle of joy, no tear of sorrow.

Undine has come to earth to seek for a soul. Without one she may never
know the golden gifts God has given to each mortal, gifts these of
love, joy, sorrow.

You will read in this little book how Undine, the water maiden, won
for herself a human soul.

MARY MACGREGOR.




CONTENTS


Chap.

I.     The Fisherman and the Knight

II.    Undine is Lost

III.   Undine is Found

IV.    The Knight's Story

V.     The Knight stays at the Cottage

VI.    The Wedding

VII.   Undine's Story

VIII.  Huldbrand and Undine leave the Cottage

IX.    The Knight returns to the City

X.     The Birthday Feast

XI.    The Journey to Castle Ringstetten

XII.   Castle Ringstetten

XIII.  The Black Valley

XIV.   Huldbrand forgets his Promise

XV.    Huldbrand and Bertalda

XVI.   Bertalda's Wedding

XVII.  The Burial




LIST OF PICTURES


On the threshold stood a little maiden  _Frontispiece_

Amid the sweet-scented grass, safe from the fury of the storm

'I saw in a great cavern a group of little goblins'

In the little cottage were heard the solemn words of the marriage service

The three travellers soon reached the leafy shades of the forest

At the sound of his voice the girl burst into tears

The little waves seemed to sob as they whispered, 'Alas! alas!'

Slowly, slowly there rose out of the mouth of the well a white figure




CHAPTER I

THE FISHERMAN AND THE KNIGHT


A fisherman brought a stool to the doorway of his home and, sitting
down, he began to mend his nets.

His cottage stood in the midst of green meadows, and his eyes grew
glad as he looked at the green grass. After the heat of the fair
summer's day it was so cool, so refreshing.

At the foot of the meadows lay a large lake of clear blue water. The
fisherman knew it well. It was there his work was done, through
sunshine or through storm.

To-day, as his gaze wandered from the green meadows to the blue lake,
he thought he saw the waters stretch out soft arms, until slowly they
drew the fair meadows, the little cottage into a loving embrace.

The fisherman, his wife and their foster-child lived very quietly on
this pleasant spot. It was but seldom that any one passed their door,
for between the beautiful meadows and the nearest town lay a wood. So
wild and gloomy was the wood, so tangled its pathway, that no one
cared to enter it.

Moreover, it was said that there were strange beings lurking amid the
gloom--ugly goblins, misshapen gnomes; and there were shadowy spirits
too, which flitted through the branches of the strongest trees, and
these even the bravest would not wish to see.

Through this dark and haunted wood the old fisherman had often to
journey.

It was true that he entered the dreaded shades with fear, yet no
spectre ever crossed his path. But perhaps that was because the
thoughts of the old man were pure, or perhaps because he never entered
the forest without singing a hymn in a clear brave voice.

As the fisherman sat mending his nets on this fair summer eve he began
to move restlessly, to glance around uneasily.

Then a sudden terror fell upon him as he heard a noise in the forest
behind.

Ah, how the trees rustled and how the grass was being trampled
underfoot! Could it be a horseman who made haste to escape from some
terrible foe?

And now, although he was wide awake, the fisherman seemed to see a
figure, which he had seen before only in his dreams.

He saw the figure of a tall, strong, snow-white man, who came with
slow steps toward him, and at each step he took, the figure nodded his
great white head.

The fisherman rubbed his eyes as he glanced toward the wood. At the
same moment the wind seemed to blow the leaves aside to make room for
the snow-white man, whose head never ceased to nod.

'Well,' said the fisherman to himself, 'I have ever passed through the
forest unharmed, why should I fear that evil will befall me here?' and
he began to repeat aloud a verse of the Bible.

At the sound of his own voice courage crept back into the heart of the
fisherman, moreover the words of the Holy Book rebuked his fears. Nor
was it long before he was able even to laugh and to see how foolish he
had been.

For listen! The white nodding man was after all only a stream which
the fisherman knew very well, a stream which ran and bubbled out of
the forest and fell into the lake. As for the rustling noise, the
fisherman saw what had caused that, as a gaily clad knight rode forth
from the forest shadows toward the little cottage.

This was no spectre or spirit of the wood, this stranger who wore the
garments of a knight of high degree. He rode a white horse, which
stepped softly, so that the flowers in the meadows lifted their
delicate heads uninjured by his tread.

The fisherman raised his cap as the stranger drew near, and then
quietly went on mending his nets.

Now when the knight saw the old man's face it was welcome to him, as
indeed any human face would have been after the terrors of the forest.
There he had seen strange mocking faces peering at him whichever way
he turned, there he had been followed by strange shadowy forms from
which escape had been wellnigh impossible; here at length was a kind
and friendly mortal. He would ask him for the food and shelter of
which both he and his steed stood in need.

'Dear sir,' answered the fisherman when he had listened to the
knight's request, 'dear sir, if you will deign to enter our lonely
cottage, you will find a welcome with the food and shelter we offer.
As for your horse, can it have a better stable than this tree-shaded
meadow, or more delicious fodder than this green grass?'

Well pleased with this answer, the knight dismounted, and together he
and the fisherman freed the white horse from its saddle and bridle,
and turned it loose into the waving meadow.

Then the old man led the stranger into the cottage.

Here, by the light of the kitchen fire, sat the fisherman's wife. She
rose, with a kind greeting for the unexpected guest. Then seating
herself again in her armchair, she pointed to an old stool with a
broken leg. 'Sit there, good knight,' she said; 'only you must sit
still, lest the broken leg prove too weak to bear you.'

Carrying the stool over beside the old woman, the knight placed it
carefully on the floor and seated himself as he was bidden. As he sat
there talking with the good old fisherman and his wife, it seemed to
him almost as though he were their son, who had come home again after
journeying in a distant land.

It was only when the knight began to speak of the wood that the
fisherman grew restless and refused to listen.

'It were wiser, Sir Knight,' he said, 'not to talk of the wood at
nightfall, or indeed to say much of it at any time.'

And then the old couple told their guest how simply they lived in the
little cottage by the lake, and they in their turn listened eagerly
while the knight told them of himself. He was named Sir Huldbrand, and
he dwelt in his castle of Ringstetten, which stood near the source of
the river Danube.

Now, as he talked or listened to the quiet tales of the old fisherman,
the knight heard a strange sound that seemed to come from the
direction of the window. Again and again it came, a strange sound as
of water being dashed against the window-panes.

It was plain that the fisherman heard it too, for at each splash a
frown crossed his good-natured face.

A louder splash, and a shower of water streamed through the loosely
built window-frame into the kitchen.

Then the old man could sit still no longer. He hastened to the window,
and opening it called out in an angry voice, 'Undine, cease these
childish tricks. A stranger, and he a knight, is in our cottage.'

A low laugh answered him. Hearing it, the old man shut the window and
sat down again, saying to his guest, 'Sir Knight, forgive this rude
behaviour. Undine my foster-daughter is still only a child, although
she is now nearly eighteen years of age. Yet her tricks are harmless,
and she herself is full of kindness.'

'Ah,' said the old woman to her husband, 'to you, who are not with her
save when the day's work is over, her pranks may seem harmless. But
you would not talk so lightly of her ways were she by your side all
day. Ever I must watch her, lest she spoil my baking, or undo my
spinning or burn the soup. Nay--'

'It is true,' said the old man, interrupting his wife with a smile,
'it is true that you have the maiden by your side throughout the
livelong day, while I have but the sea. Yet when the sea is rough and
breaks down my dykes I do not love it the less. Even so do you love
the little one no less for all her tricks and tiresome ways.'

The old woman turned to her guest. 'Indeed, Sir Knight, he speaks
truly. It is not possible to be angry with the maiden long.'

At that moment the door flew open, and she, the maiden of whom they
spoke, entered the little kitchen. She was fairer far than any one the
knight had ever seen.

'Father,' she cried, 'where is he, the stranger guest?'

Even as she spoke her eyes fell on the knight, who had sprung to his
feet as she entered the cottage. He stood gazing in wonder at the
marvellous beauty of the maiden.

But before he could greet her, she was at his side, trustingly looking
up into his face. Then kneeling before him, she seized his hand and
made him seat himself again on the broken old stool.

'You are beautiful, Sir Knight,' she said, 'but how did you come to
this little cottage? Have you looked for us long before you could find
us? Have you had to pass through the terrible forest ere you could
reach us, Sir Knight?'

The knight would have told the maiden the story of his adventures in
the wood, but Undine's foster-mother was already speaking, and her
tones were loud and angry.

'Go, maiden, go get you to work, and trouble not the stranger with
your questions.'

Then Undine, unashamed, drew a little footstool near to Huldbrand, and
sitting down to her spinning, cried, 'I shall work here, close to the
beautiful knight.'

The old fisherman took no notice of the wilful maiden, and began to
speak of other things, hoping that the guest would forget his
foster-daughter's questions.

But even had the knight been able to forget, Undine did not mean to
sit there quietly, her questions unanswered.

Her sweet voice broke upon the silence. 'Our beautiful guest has not
yet told me how he reached our cottage,' she said.

'It is even as you thought,' answered the knight. 'I journeyed through
the haunted wood ere I found this safe and hospitable shelter.'

'Then tell me of your wonderful adventures,' demanded the maiden, 'for
without these no one may pass through the forest.'

Huldbrand shuddered as he remembered the strange beings who had
startled him as he rode through the wood. He glanced distrustfully
toward the window. Were the grim figures there, peering at him through
the window-pane? No, he could see nothing save the dim night light,
which now closed them in.

The knight drew himself up, ashamed of his foolish fears, and turning
toward the maiden, he was beginning to tell her of the wonders which
had befallen him, when the fisherman hurriedly interrupted.

'Nay, now, Sir Knight,' he cried, 'tell not your tale until the hours
of dark have passed.'

At her foster-father's words Undine sprang angrily from the footstool
and stood before him. Her eyes flashed and grew larger, colder.

'You say to the stranger not to tell his tale, father,' she cried,
'you say to him not to answer me. But he shall speak, he shall, he
shall!' And in her anger she stamped her little feet.

The knight wellnigh smiled as he watched the maiden's wrath, but the
old man was grieved that the stranger should see the wayward behaviour
of his foster-child, and he reproved her for her anger. The old woman
also muttered her displeasure.

Then Undine slipped quickly toward the door of the little cottage. She
did not choose to listen to these rebukes.

'I will not stay with you, for you do nothing but scold me, and you
will not do anything that I wish,' she cried, and before they could
reach her she had opened the door, and was away and out, out into the
dark night.




CHAPTER II

UNDINE IS LOST


Huldbrand and the fisherman sprang after the maiden, but when they
reached the door of the cottage and looked out into the night she was
nowhere to be seen, nor could they catch the sound of her tiny feet to
guide them whither she had fled.

The knight looked in astonishment at his host. Was the beautiful
maiden only another of the wonderful beings who had bewildered him in
the forest? Was she some lovely elf or sprite who had come but to vex
them with her pranks?

But as he looked at the old man standing by his side, and saw the
tears streaming from his eyes, he knew it was for no spirit of the
wood that he thus grieved.

'Alas,' sighed the fisherman, 'this is not the first time that the
maiden has treated us thus. It may be she will not return the
livelong night, and until she returns it is not possible that we
should close our eyes. For what terror may not seize upon her as she
wanders hither and thither in the darkness.'

'We must follow her, father, follow her without delay!' cried the
young knight.

'Nay,' answered the fisherman, 'my limbs are stiff. Though I knew
whither she had fled, I could never follow with speed enough to reach
her. Ever she would vanish as I drew near, for she is fleet, fleet as
an arrow from the bow.'

'If we may not follow her, at least let us call and entreat her to
return,' said the young knight, and without waiting for an answer he
called, 'Undine! Undine!'

But the old man shook his head. 'It is useless to call,' he said, 'the
little one will not heed your voice.' Yet still the knight's cry rang
out into the night, 'Undine, dear Undine, I pray you return!'

No answer came back from the darkness, and at length Huldbrand
returned with the fisherman to the cottage.

The old woman, who seemed little troubled by Undine's flight, had gone
to bed and the fire was wellnigh out. But the fisherman, drawing the
ashes together, placed wood on the top of them, and soon the fire
blazed brightly.

Then in the light of the flames they sat and talked, yet they thought
only of Undine. The window rattled. They raised their heads to listen.
The rain fell in heavy drops, pitter, patter. They thought it was the
tread of tiny feet.

'It is she, it is Undine!' they would cry, yet still the maiden did
not come. Then they shook their heads sadly, but as they went on
talking they listened still.

'It was fifteen years ago, on such a night of wind and rain, that she
came,' murmured the old man. 'Our home was sad and desolate, for we
had lost our own little child.'

'Ah,' said the knight, 'tell me how the beautiful maiden came to your
little cottage.'

Now this is the story the fisherman told to the knight.

'It is fifteen years ago,' began the old man, 'since I went through
the forest, hoping to sell my fish in the city beyond. I was alone,
for my wife was at home watching our little babe. Our little babe was
dear to us and very fair.

'In the evening, having sold all my fish, I went home through the
haunted forest, nor did I fear its gloom, for the Lord was at my
right hand.

'But no sooner had I left the wood than I saw my wife running toward
me, while tears streamed from her eyes. She had dressed herself, I
noticed, in black garments, and this she was not used to do. I felt
sure that trouble had befallen us.

'"Where is our child, our little one?" I cried, though even as I spoke
my voice was choked with sobs.

'"Our child is with God, the great Father," answered my wife.

'Then in the midst of her tears the poor mother told her sad tale.

'"I took our child down to the edge of the lake, and there we played
together, so happy, so merry. Suddenly the little one bent forward as
though she saw something beautiful in the water. Then she smiled, and
stretched out her tiny hands, and even as she did so, she slipped from
my arms into the lake, and I saw her no more."

'That evening,' said the fisherman, 'my wife and I sat by our hearth
in silence, we were too sad for words. Suddenly the door of our
cottage flew open, and there before us,[1] on the threshold, stood a
little maiden, three or four years of age. Her eyes were blue and her
hair was gold and she was clothed in beautiful garments.

[Footnote 1: See frontispiece.]

'We gazed in wonder at the tiny vision. Who was she? From whence had
she come? Was she only a magic child come to mock us in our
loneliness, or was she a real, a living child?

'Then as we looked we saw that water trickled from her golden hair and
that little streams were gathering at her tiny feet, as the water
dripped and dripped from her beautiful clothing.

'"She must have fallen into the lake," I said to my wife, "and in some
strange way have wandered into our cottage. We have lost our own dear
child, let us now do all we can to help this little one." Thus it came
to pass that the little stranger slept in the cot in which until now
our own babe had lain.

'When morning dawned my wife fed our tiny guest with bread and milk,
and the little one looked upon us, and her blue eyes danced merrily,
but never a word did she say.

'We asked her where her father and mother dwelt and how she had come
to our cottage. But her only answer was some childish talk of crystal
palaces and shining pearls. Even now indeed she speaks of things so
marvellous that we know not what to think.

'After some days we asked her once again from whence she came. She
told us that she had been on the sea with her mother, and had fallen
from her arms into the water, nor had she known more until she awoke
under the trees, close to our cottage, so well pleased with the fair
shore that she felt no fear.

'Then we said, "Let us keep the little stranger, and care for her as
we would have cared for our own lost child." We sent for a priest, who
baptized her, giving her the name by which she called herself, though
indeed it seemed no name for a Christian child.

'"Undine," said the priest as he performed the holy rite, while she,
the little one, stood before him gentle and sweet. No sooner, however,
was the service ended than she grew wild, wilful as was her way. For
it is true that my wife has had much trouble with the maiden--'

At that moment the knight interrupted the fisherman.

'Listen,' he cried, 'how the stream roars as it dashes past the
window!'

Together they sprang to the door. The moon had risen, and the knight
and the fisherman saw that the stream which ran from the wood had
burst its banks. It was now rushing wildly along, carrying with it
stones and roots of trees. As they looked, the clouds grew dark and
crept across the face of the moon, the wind rose and lashed the water
of the lake into great waves.

'Undine! Undine!' cried the two men together, but no answer reached
them save the shrieking of the wind among the trees of the forest.

Then, careless of the storm, the fisherman and the knight rushed from
the cottage in search of the maiden.




CHAPTER III

UNDINE IS FOUND


As Huldbrand rushed out into the night, followed by the fisherman, the
storm seemed to rage yet more fiercely. The old man was soon left far
behind in the search for the lost maiden.

The knight, battling bravely with the storm, hastened hither and
thither, but all his efforts were vain. Undine was nowhere to be
found.

And now, as the rain dashed down upon him and the wind hustled him,
Huldbrand grew bewildered. The storm seemed to have changed the
peaceful meadows into a weary wilderness, and even the maiden herself
seemed to flit before him as a phantom spirit of the wind.

Could it all have been but a dream? Had the cottage, the fisherman and
his wife been as unreal as the figures that had followed him in the
haunted forest? No, that he would not believe, for even yet in the
distance he could hear the faint echo of the fisherman's voice as he
called out pitifully, 'Undine! Undine!' Now in his search the knight
had reached the edge of the stream. The stream, as you know, had
already overflowed its bank, and as the moon suddenly shone through
the dark clouds, Huldbrand saw that the water was rushing back toward
the forest. In this way the little bit of meadow-land on which the
fisherman's cottage stood was turned into an island.

A terrible thought struck the knight. Had Undine strayed into the
fearful forest she could not now return to the cottage, save across
the raging stream, nay, she might even now be surrounded by the
spirits of the wood. She would be among them alone, helpless.

At once Huldbrand made up his mind to cross the torrent. He plunged
into the water, and even as he did so he seemed to see on the other
shore the figure of a tall white man, who nodded his head and mocked
him as he struggled on. Huldbrand knew the tall white figure only too
well. It was the one that had followed him as he journeyed through the
forest.

Now; in his haste to find Undine, the knight was leaping from stone to
stone, sometimes slipping into the water, then with a struggle
placing his feet once again upon the stones. These, tossed by the
rushing stream, gave no firm foothold to the knight, and he was forced
to seize the branch of a fir-tree to help him across the dangerous
passage.

While he was still in the midst of the current, he heard a sweet voice
crying, 'Trust not the stream, trust it not, for it is full of craft!'

The knight knew the voice. It was that of the maiden for whom he
sought. Yet though he peered eagerly through the gloom he could see no
trace of her.

'See! you can find me now, Sir Knight, for the moon is shining clear,'
cried the voice he longed to hear, and looking around him Huldbrand
saw where Undine had found a shelter. It was on a little island,
beneath the branches of a great tree, that the maiden sat. There was
no terror of the storm in her eyes. She was even smiling happily as
she nestled amid the sweet scented grass, safe from the fury of the
storm.

A few quick strides and the knight had crossed the stream and stood by
the side of the maiden. She bade him sit down on the grass, and then,
whispering low, she said, 'You shall tell me your story here, Sir
Knight, on this quiet island here, where no cross old people will
disturb us, and where we are sheltered from the storm that rages
beyond.'

[Illustration: Amid the sweet-scented grass, safe from the fury of the
storm]

Then Huldbrand forgot all about the old man who was still seeking for
his child, forgot too all about the old woman who was alone in the
little cottage by the lake, and he sat down to tell his tale as the
maiden wished.

Meanwhile the fisherman had reached the brink of the stream, and great
was his surprise to see the knight seated by the side of his lost
child.

'You have found her, you have found my little one!' he cried
reproachfully. 'Why did you not hasten to tell me she was found, Sir
Knight?'

Then Huldbrand was ashamed, though, as he told the old man, it was but
a little while since his search had ceased.

'Bring her without more delay to the mainland!' shouted the fisherman,
when he had listened to the sorry excuse which was all the knight
could offer.

But Undine had no wish to go home. She would rather stay with the
knight in the forest than go back to the cottage, for there, so she
said, no one would do as she wished.

Then, flinging her arms around the knight, she clung to him and
begged him to stay with her in the forest.

The old fisherman wept as he heard her words, yet Undine did not seem
to notice his tears. But the knight could not help seeing the old
man's grief, and he was troubled.

'Undine,' he cried, 'the tears of your foster-father have touched my
heart. We will return to him.'

The blue eyes of the maiden opened wide with surprise, yet she
answered gently, 'Sir Knight, if this is indeed your will, we shall
return to the mainland. There you must make the old man promise to
listen in silence to all that you saw as you journeyed through the
forest.'

'Only come, and you shall do all that you wish!' cried the fisherman,
and he stretched out his arms and nodded his head, to show to the
maiden how glad he was that she should do as she wished. But the
knight shuddered as his eyes fell upon the fisherman. The nodding
head, the white hair reminded him once again of the tall white man of
the forest.

Shaking off his fears he lifted Undine in his arms and bore her across
the stream. Already the storm was wellnigh over and the waters flowed
more quietly. It now seemed to the knight only a few steps from the
grassy plot where he had found the maiden to the green meadows among
which the cottage stood.

'Now will I hear the brave knight's story,' cried the maiden, and the
old people smiled and said they too would hear the tale.

And the sun rose slowly over the lake and the birds sang merrily on
the wet and leafy trees, as the knight began his tale.




CHAPTER IV

THE KNIGHT'S STORY


'It must be about eight days ago now,' said the knight, 'since I left
my castle of Ringstetten, and journeyed toward the city which lies
beyond the haunted forest.

'The city was gay with lords and ladies who had come thither for the
tournament which was then being held.

'I at once entered the lists, for my steed was strong and I myself was
eager for the fray. Once, as I rested from the combat, my eyes fell
upon a lady who was wondrous fair. She was looking down from a gallery
upon the tournament.

'Bertalda was the name of the beautiful maiden, and she was the
foster-child of a great duke. I knew that, as I again seized my lance,
the lady's eyes followed me into the lists, and I fought even more
bravely than before.

'In the evening a great festival was held, and here I met Bertalda,
and danced with her; indeed, evening after evening we were together
until the tournament drew to a close.'

As Huldbrand spoke these words he felt a sharp pain in his left hand.
It was hanging by his side, and as he looked down to see what had
caused the pain, he found that Undine had fastened in it her little
pearly teeth.

The knight could see that the maiden's face was no longer smiling. She
looked up at him, and there was sorrow in her large blue eyes as she
whispered, 'Sir Knight, it is your own fault that I hurt you. I would
not have you praise the lady Bertalda.' Then quickly, as though
ashamed of her words, she hid her face in her hands.

As the knight went on with his story, his face was grave.

'It is true,' he said, 'that Bertalda was a lovely maiden, yet as I
knew her better I found her ways were cold and proud. She pleased me
less as the days passed by, though, as she looked upon me with favour,
I begged that as a token of it she would give me a glove.

"You shall have it," answered she, "if you will go alone through the
forest which men say is haunted, and bring me tidings of all that
happens to you."

'I cared little for her glove, but I would not tarry to be asked a
second time to go through the forest, lest the maiden should doubt my
courage.'

'I thought Bertalda had loved you,' cried Undine, 'yet then had she
not driven you from her into the haunted forest.'

The knight smiled at the maiden's words and went on with his tale.

'It was but yesterday morning that I set forth on my adventure. The
sun shone bright, so bright that it was not easy to believe that evil
was lurking in the shadows beneath the rustling leaves. "I shall soon
return," I said to myself, as I plunged into the green shade.

'But amid the maze of trees it was not long ere I lost sight of the
path by which I had entered the wood.

'"It may be that I shall lose myself in this mighty forest," I
thought, "but no other danger threatens me."

'I gazed up toward the sun, which had risen higher now than when first
I entered the wood, and as I gazed I saw a black thing among the
branches of a leafy oak.

'Was it a bear, I wondered, and my hand felt for the sword that hung
by my side.

'But it was no bear, for ere long I heard a voice mocking me with
rough and cruel words. "Aha, Sir Wiseacre," said the voice, "I am
breaking twigs off these tall trees, so that at midnight I may light a
fire in which to roast you." Then, before I could answer, the black
thing grinned at me and rustled the branches, until my steed grew
restless and at length galloped away.'

Undine looked at the knight, her blue eyes sparkling as she cried,
'But indeed the wicked creature did not dare to roast you, Sir
Knight!'

'In its terror,' continued Huldbrand, 'my horse dashed itself against
the trees, reared and again rushed madly forward. Onward we flew,
until at length I saw before me a dark abyss. Yet still I found it
impossible to pull up my frightened steed.

'Then all at once a tall white man stood still directly in front of my
maddened horse, which swerved aside as soon as it saw the tall man,
and in that moment I was once more master of my steed. I saw also that
my deliverer was not a tall white man, as I had imagined, but a brook,
which shone silver in the sunlight.'

'Dear brook, I will be grateful to you for evermore,' cried Undine,
clapping her hands as she spoke, in childish glee. But the fisherman
shook his head and was silent.

'And now,' said the knight, 'I was anxious to hasten as quickly as
possible through the forest, for it seemed to me that not only might I
find it difficult to regain the pathway I had lost, but that strange
beings might again startle both me and my noble steed.

'I turned my horse away from the dark chasm which lay before us, but
even as I did so I found at my side a strange little man. He was
uglier than any one I had ever seen. His nose was wellnigh as large as
all the rest of his body, and his mouth was so big that it stretched
from one ear to the other.

'This ugly creature, as soon as he saw that I had noticed him, grinned
at me, until his mouth looked even larger than before. He scraped his
feet along the ground and bowed mockingly to me a thousand times.

'My horse was trembling at the sight of the strange figure, so I
resolved to ride on in search of further adventure, or if I found
none, to ride back to the city which I had left in the morning.

'But the ugly little man did not mean to let me escape. Quick as
lightning he sprang round and stood again in front of my horse.

'"Get out of the way," I now cried in anger, "lest my steed tramples
you under its feet."

'This did not seem to frighten the strange creature. He laughed in my
face, and then said in a gruff voice, "You must give me gold, for it
was I who turned your horse aside from yonder dark abyss."

'"Nay, what you say is not true," I answered him, "for it was the
silver brook that saved me and my horse from being dashed to pieces.
Nevertheless, take thy gold and begone."

'As I spoke I flung a coin into the strange-shaped cap which he was
holding before me, then putting spurs to my horse I rode quickly
forward.

'I heard the ugly little man give a loud scream, then to my surprise
there he was, running by my side, grinning and making horrible
grimaces.

'My horse was galloping, and I thought I would soon get away from the
little man. But it seemed impossible to go faster than he, for he took
a spring, a jump, and there he was still by my side. He held up the
piece of gold I had thrown to him, and in a hollow voice he cried, "It
is a false coin, a false coin!"

'At length I could bear his horrible shrieks no longer. I pulled up my
steed, and holding out two coins I called to him, "Take the gold, but
follow me no farther!"

'Then the little ugly man began to scrape his feet and bow his head,
but it was plain that he was not yet satisfied.

'"I do not wish your gold," he grumbled. "I have gold enough and to
spare, as you shall soon see."

'As he spoke a strange thing happened. The beautiful green ground
seemed to change into clear green glass. I looked through the glass
and saw in a great cavern a group of little goblins.

'They were playing at ball, these little goblins, and I noticed that
all their toys were made of silver or gold. Merry little creatures
they were, running swiftly hither and thither after the ball, nor was
it easy to see whether they were standing on their heads or on their
heels, or whether they were running on their hands or on their feet.
No sooner was their game ended than they pelted each other with their
playthings, then in a mad frolic lifted handfuls of gold dust and
flung it each in the other's eyes.

'All this time the ugly little man was standing half on the ground and
half within the great cavern where the tiny goblins played their
games. Now I heard him call to the mischievous imps to give him
handfuls of gold.

[Illustration: 'I saw in a great cavern a group of little goblins']

'This they did, and then he, laughing in my face, showed the gold to
me ere he flung it back again into the cavern.

'Then the ugly little man called to the tiny goblins to stop their
pranks and look at the coins I had given to him. When they caught
sight of them they held their little sides, shaking with laughter;
then all at once they turned and hissed at me.

'In spite of myself terror crept over me. Again I plunged my spurs
into my horse's sides, and it dashed madly off into the midst of the
forest.

'When at length the flight ended, the evening lay cool and quiet
around me. A white footpath seemed to point out the way which led back
to the city. But each time I tried to approach it a face peered at me
from between the trees. I turned to escape from this new phantom, but
in vain, for whichever way I turned there was the face still staring
at me.

'I grew angry and urged my horse in the direction of the shadowy face,
only however to find myself drenched by a stream of white foam.

'Thus I was driven away from the white footpath, and only one way,
rough and tangled, was left open to me. As soon as I began to follow
it, the face, though it kept close behind, did me no further harm.

'Yet again and again I turned, hoping to find that the face had
disappeared. Instead I found it closer than before, and now I could
see that it belonged to a tall white man. It was true that at times
the long white figure seemed to be but a wandering stream, but of this
I was never sure.

I was weary now and my horse was exhausted. It seemed useless to try
any longer to force my way past the white face, so I went on riding
quietly along the one path left open to me. The head of the tall man
then began to nod, as though to say that at length I was doing as he
wished.

'By this path I reached the end of the wood, and as the meadows and
the lake came into sight the white man vanished, and I found myself
standing near to your little cottage.'

As the knight had now finished the story of his adventure, the
fisherman began to talk to his guest of how he might return in safety
to the city and to the followers who there awaited him.

Huldbrand, listening to the old man, yet caught the soft ripple of
Undine's laughter.

'Why do you laugh, Undine?' asked the knight. 'Are you so pleased to
hear your foster-father talk of my return to the city?'

'I laugh for joy that you cannot leave us,' said the maiden. 'You have
but to look to see that you must stay.'

Huldbrand and the fisherman rose and saw that what the maiden had said
was indeed true. It would not be possible for the knight to leave the
little island until the stream had once more returned to its usual
course.

As they entered the cottage, Huldbrand whispered to the maiden,
'Undine, tell me that you are glad that I cannot yet return to the
crowded city.'

But the maiden's face was no longer glad, nor would she answer the
knight's question. She had remembered Bertalda.

When the stream had grown quiet the knight would go back to the lady
for whose sake he had undergone such strange perils. And of that time
the wilful maiden did not wish to think.




CHAPTER V

THE KNIGHT STAYS AT THE COTTAGE


Day after day the forest stream rushed wildly on. The bed along which
it thus hastened grew wider and wider, separating the island with the
fisherman's cottage yet farther from the mainland.

The knight was well pleased to linger where he was. Never had he found
the days pass by so swiftly.

He discovered an old crossbow in a corner of the cottage. When he had
mended it he would wander forth in search of birds, and if he
succeeded in bringing some down with his arrows, he would carry them
back to fill the larder of the little cottage.

And Undine, for she was pitiful, would not fail to upbraid the knight
for taking the life of the little birds, so glad, so free. Seeing them
lying there, quiet and still, she would weep.

Yet, did Huldbrand return without his prey, so wilful was the maiden
that she would blame him, and complain that she could now have nought
to eat save fish or crabs.

But the knight loved Undine's wayward words. And well he knew that
after she had shown her anger most, she would in but a little while be
again kind and gentle as before.

On the quiet island Huldbrand heard no call to knightly deeds. His
sword hung unused on the cottage wall, his steed fed undisturbed among
the sweet-scented meadows.

'The maiden is the daughter of a great prince, thought the knight. 'It
is not possible that she should remain in this humble cottage all her
life. She shall be my bride, and in days to come she shall dwell in my
castle of Ringstetten on the banks of the Danube.'

Meanwhile, naught disturbed the dwellers in the little cottage, save
now and again when her foster-mother would chide Undine in the
presence of the knight.

Now, though this displeased Huldbrand, he could not blame the old
woman, for it was ever true that the maiden deserved reproof more
often than she received it.

At length wine and food began to grow scarce in the little cottage.
In the evening, when the wind howled around their home, the fisherman
and the knight had been used to cheer themselves with a flask of wine.
But now that the fisherman was not able to reach the city, his supply
of wine had come to an end. Without it the old man and the knight grew
silent and dull.

Undine teased them, laughed at them, but they did not join in her
merriment.

Then one evening the maiden left the cottage, to escape, so she said,
from the gloomy faces in the little kitchen. It was a stormy night,
and as it grew dark the wind began to blow, the waters to rise.
Huldbrand and the fisherman thought of the terrible night on which
they had sought so long in vain for the wilful maiden. They even began
to fear that they had lost her again, and together they rushed to the
door. But to their great delight Undine was standing there, laughing
and clapping her little hands.

'Come with me,' she cried when she saw them, 'come with me and I will
show you a cask which the stream has thrown ashore. If it is not a
wine cask you may punish me as you will.'

The men went with her, and there in a little creek they found the
cask and began to roll it toward the cottage.

But though they rolled it rapidly the storm crept quickly up. So black
were the clouds, so threatening, that it seemed each moment that the
rain would burst forth upon them.

Undine helped the men to roll the cask, and as the sky grew yet more
threatening she looked up at the dark clouds and said in a warning
voice, 'Beware, beware that you wet us not.'

'It is wrong of you thus to try to rebuke the storm,' said her
foster-father, but at his words the maiden only laughed low to herself
in the darkness.

It would seem, however, that Undine's warning had been of use, for it
was not until the cask was rolled in at the cottage door that the
storm broke.

By the bright glow of the fire they opened the cask and found that it
did indeed hold wine. They tasted it and found it very good, and soon
they were once more as gay as the maiden could wish.

Then suddenly the fisherman grew grave, grieving for him who had lost
the cask.

'Nay, grieve not,' said the knight, 'I will seek for the owner and
repay him for his loss when I come again to my castle at
Ringstetten.'

The fisherman smiled and was content.

Undine, however, was angry with the knight. 'It is foolish,' said she,
'to talk of seeking for the owner of the cask. Were you lost in the
search I should weep. Would you not rather stay by my side?'

'Yes, and that do you right well know,' answered the knight.

'Then,' said the maiden, 'why should you speak of helping other
people. It is but foolish talk.'

The foster-mother sighed as she listened to Undine's careless words,
while the fisherman forgot his usual quiet and scolded her sharply.

'Your words are wild, and are such as no Christian maiden should
utter,' he said. 'May God forgive both you and those who have allowed
you thus to speak.'

'It is indeed true,' said Undine, 'that as I think I speak. Why,
therefore, should you scold me for my words.'

'Say no more,' said the fisherman, for he was very angry.

Then the maiden, who, for all her wilfulness, was timid as a bird,
drew close to the knight and whispered, 'Are you also angry with me,
Sir Knight.'

Huldbrand could find no words with which to comfort the maiden, whom
he had learned to love. He could only hold her hand and stroke her
golden hair, but with this Undine was well content.




CHAPTER VI

THE WEDDING


Now it was on this same night on which the cask was found that, as the
storm still raged, a knock was heard at the cottage door. It startled
all within, for who was there could have crossed the stream that now
separated them from the mainland? It could surely be no mortal who
stood without.

As the inhabitants of the little cottage sat silent, thinking these
thoughts, the knock was heard again. It was followed by a low groan.
Then the knight rose and took his sword from the wall where it had
hung for many days. But the fisherman, watching him, shook his head as
he muttered, 'A sword will be of but little use to-night.'

Undine meanwhile had gone toward the door. She did not open it, but
she called out in a loud voice, 'Remember, whoever you be, spirit of
earth or fire, that if harm befall us my uncle Kühleborn will punish
you.'

These strange words made the knight marvel. But a voice answered the
maiden, 'I am no wandering spirit, but an old frail man. For the love
of God open your door and give me shelter from the storm.'

At these words Undine, holding a lamp high in one hand, flung the door
wide open with the other. Before her stood an old priest, who looked
upon her with surprise. How came so fair a maiden to be dwelling in so
lonely a home? he wondered, and in his bewilderment he stood still
outside the shelter and warmth which awaited him.

'Will you not enter, holy Father?' said Undine.

The priest roused himself to thank the beautiful maiden, and then
entered the kitchen. Water flowed from his long robe and trickled from
his long white beard and snowy locks.

'Come with me, Father,' said the fisherman, and he drew the priest
into a little room and made him take off all his wet garments. Then,
clad in a suit of dry clothes which belonged to his host, the priest
returned to the kitchen.

The old woman pulled forward her own armchair and made the priest sit
in it, while Undine brought a little stool and put it beneath the feet
of the stranger.

Meanwhile food was placed before the priest. When he had eaten he was
refreshed and able to tell his host how he had reached the island.

'It was but yesterday,' he said, 'that I was sailing across the lake,
when a sudden storm arose. A wave dashed upon my boat, overturning it
and throwing me on to the shore. I lay there stunned for some time.
Then, as I slowly recovered my senses, I saw a footpath before me, and
following it I reached the shelter of your cottage.'

Then the fisherman said to the priest, 'Unless the stream subsides we
shall, I fear, be in need of food. For days I have found it wellnigh
impossible to fish in the lake, and even should I be able to do so I
could not sell my fish. It would be too hard a task to reach the city
beyond the wood until the stream once more runs quietly between its
banks.'

To Huldbrand as he listened it mattered not though the stream rushed
on for ever. The world beyond the wood was becoming to the knight more
and more as a dream. Also the little island on which he was living
seemed to him the most beautiful spot on earth, for on it dwelt the
maiden he loved so well.

As these thoughts passed through the knight's mind he turned, and saw
at once that Undine must have annoyed her foster-mother, for the old
woman was casting angry looks upon the maiden. Perhaps the angry looks
would be followed by harsh words, as had happened on other days.

Quickly the knight made up his mind. Were Undine but his wife, no one
would venture to reprove her. The priest was in the cottage. Why
should he not marry the beautiful maiden without delay?

He spoke a few words to Undine, then drawing her gently toward the
priest he said, 'Father, you see before you the maiden whom I love,
whom, if her foster-parents are willing, I would wed this very day.'

The priest turned to the fisherman and his wife. 'You hear the words
of the noble knight,' he said. 'Are you willing that he should wed the
maiden?'

It was easy to see that the old people were in no way startled by the
priest's words.

'To no braver or more courteous knight could we give our
foster-child,' said the fisherman, and his wife smiled and nodded as
he spoke.

Then the foster-mother brought two candles, which long years before
had been blessed by a holy man, and placed them on the kitchen table,
while the knight, unfastening the chain which hung around his neck,
began to take off it two golden rings, one for Undine, the other for
himself.

'Ah, do not so,' cried the maiden. 'Touch not the golden chain.
Believe me, my parents, could they know, would wish us to use the
rings they entrusted to my care when I was but a child.'

She ran quickly from the room, and when she came back she held in her
hand two radiant rings, one of which she gave to the knight, while the
other she kept for herself.

Her foster-parents looked at Undine in surprise, for they had neither
seen the rings nor known that their foster-child had any jewels in her
possession.

Then the maiden, seeing their astonishment, told how her parents had
stitched the rings into the little garments she had worn when first
she came to them, a tiny child. 'They bid me also tell no one that
they had given me these precious gems until the evening of my
wedding-day.'

Meanwhile the priest had clad himself again in his own garments, and
lighting the candles, he called to Huldbrand and the maiden to come
and kneel before him.

[Illustration: In the little cottage were heard the solemn words of
the marriage service]

Gladly they obeyed, and then in the little cottage were heard the
solemn words of the marriage service, and Undine became the wife of
Huldbrand, the knight of Ringstetten.

The maiden had been unusually quiet as she listened to the solemn
words of the marriage service, but now a spirit of mischief seemed to
seize her. She laughed and danced, she played childish tricks upon her
husband, her foster-parents, even upon the priest himself.

Her foster-mother would have rebuked Undine as of old, but the knight
silenced her, for Undine was now his wife. Yet he himself was little
pleased with her behaviour. When Undine saw a frown upon his brow, it
is true that she would grow quieter, and sitting near him, would for a
little while smooth his brow with her soft white hand. Soon, however,
a new fancy would take hold of her, she would jump up, and her tricks
would grow even more vexing than before.

Then the priest spoke, and his voice was grave.

'Lady, you are fair to look on, but I pray you to cease these foolish
ways, lest your soul become less beautiful than your face.'

Undine's laughter ceased. After a while she looked at the priest and
asked in a timid whisper, 'What is this thing which you call a soul,
holy Father?'

Over the little kitchen a hush fell as the holy man answered, 'How can
I tell you what this strange thing which we call our soul really is?
Yet can I tell you why God gives us this great gift. It is that we may
learn to know and love Him. Our bodies will grow old, and we will lay
them aside as a garment which we no longer need, while our souls will
live and dwell with Him for ever.'

Undine's eyes grew sad, tears streamed down her cheek. 'Ah,' she
sobbed, 'I have no soul, no soul. I think it would hurt me to have a
soul, yet fain would I have one.'

Then, with one of those quick changes which had at times startled her
foster-parents, she dried her tears, and ran quickly to the window.
She looked out into the night. It seemed to call her forth to a
careless, thoughtless life. Why should she stay when the wind
whispered to her and the waters brought her messages from the depths
of the sea?

'Ah no, I will have no soul!' cried Undine, turning once more toward
the priest. 'I must be free, free as the breezes and the dancing
waters.'

'Your love for me will change and grow cold,' said the knight sadly,
'unless you have a human soul. For none can love truly without this
precious gift.'

Yet even as he spoke Huldbrand was trying to stifle a fear that had
begun to creep into his heart, a fear that the maiden he had wedded
was a fairy or a mocking spirit from another world.

But his beautiful wife was smiling softly, for as he had spoken his
last words she had learned a secret. And as the knight looked into her
blue love-lit eyes he too learned the secret. Through love Undine had
won a soul, which is indeed the gift of God to every mortal.




CHAPTER VII

UNDINE'S STORY


Undine lost her wilful ways on her wedding-day.

Her foster-parents watched her, bewildered, so gentle was she, so
thoughtful. She, who had but seldom flung her arms around them,
embraced them now, and thanked them with tears in her eyes for all
their care. Nor would she let them go, until she saw that the old
woman wished to prepare breakfast.

Then she herself flew to the hearth, and making her foster-mother
rest, she swept and dusted, and prepared the meal. It was strange that
she had never thought of doing this before.

And those who dwelt with her, as they watched her grow so gracious, so
gentle, learned to love her even more than in the days when she had
been wild and wilful.

One evening Undine, with Huldbrand by her side, wandered along the
bank of the forest stream.

The knight marvelled that the waters had suddenly grown peaceful, and
that now again they were gliding quietly along their usual course.

'To-morrow,' said his fair wife sorrowfully, 'to-morrow you can ride
forth where you will.'

'But,' said Huldbrand, 'you know well that if I go I will not leave
you behind.'

'I do not think you will leave me, Huldbrand. Yet carry me across to
yonder little island, for there I will tell to you the story of the
maiden you have made your wife. It may be that when you have heard it,
you will ride away alone into the wide world.'

Then silently the knight carried her, as she wished, across the stream
to the tiny island, and laid her down on the green grass. It was on
this very spot that he had found her on the night of the terrible
storm.

'Sit there, where I can look into your eyes as I tell my tale,' said
his wife, 'for as I look I shall be able to see what you are thinking,
nor will there be any need for you to tell me.'

'In the world,' said Undine, 'there are many beings whom mortals
seldom see, for should these beings hear a mortal drawing near, they
quickly hide themselves. These beings of whom I tell you are spirits
that dwell in fire, earth, air and water.

'Those who dwell in the flames are called salamanders, nor do these
spirits wish for any other home, as they play merrily and fearlessly
among the sparkling fires.

'Deep under the earth live the gnomes, rough and fearsome spirits
they, full of malice too, should any mortal cross their path.

'In lofty forests dwell more fair and joyous spirits, guarding each
some well-loved spot from a mortal's heavy tread.

'And better known and better loved than these of whom I have told you
are the spirits who haunt the waters. These have their home in sea or
lake, in river or in little brook.

'Deep down under the blue waters, hidden from mortal eyes, are the
palaces of the water spirits. Their walls are built of crystal and are
hung with coral, their floors are paved with shining pearls.

'Deep down under the blue waters are yellow sands. There the merry
little water-spirits play their games and gambol all the glad long
days, until they leave their childhood far behind.

'Pure and fair, more fair even than the race of mortals are the
spirits of the water. Fishermen have chanced to see these water-nymphs
or mermaidens, and they have spoken of their wondrous beauty. Mortals
too have named these strange women Undines. Look upon me, Huldbrand,
look long and well, for I, your wife, am an Undine!'

The knight gazed sadly upon his beautiful wife. He wished to believe
that she was but weaving fairy tales with which to charm him through
the quiet eventide, yet as he gazed upon her he shuddered lest the
tale she told was true.

Undine saw that he shuddered, and tears sprang into her blue eyes as
she went on with her story.

'When I was a child I lived in the depths of the sea. My father's
crystal palace was my home, for he, my father, is the Lord of the
Ocean. Kühleborn is my uncle. He used to watch me with his big eyes
until I grew afraid, and even now, although I live above the waters,
he comes to me and ofttimes he frightens me as though I were again a
little child.

'Brothers and cousins, too, were mine and played with me on the yellow
sands beneath the blue sea.

'Merry were our lives and free, for the sorrows of mortals came not
near to us. We had no soul, the gift God gives to every mortal, and
without a soul no pain could enter into our lives.

'Yet my father, the King of the Ocean, longed that I, his only
daughter, should gain the great gift which is given to every mortal.
And this he wished, though well he knew that to mortals was given,
with the gift of a soul, the power to suffer.

'An Undine can gain a soul in one way alone. She must love and be
loved by one of mortal birth.

'You, Huldbrand, you have given me my soul, and should you now despise
me or drive me from you, I should suffer even as one of your own race.

'Yet if you care not to have an Undine for your wife, leave me, and I
will plunge into the waters. Then Kühleborn, my uncle, who brought me
a merry happy child to the fisherman, will come and carry me back to
my ocean home. There will I live, loving, sorrowing, for into the
depths of the blue sea will I carry my new-won soul.'

Then Huldbrand forgot everything save the great love he bore his fair
wife Undine. He took her in his arms and carried her across the
little stream, whispering to her that she should never leave him.

Together they went back to the cottage, and to the water-maiden the
little dwelling gleamed more bright than the crystal palace of the
Ocean King.




CHAPTER VIII

HULDBRAND AND UNDINE LEAVE THE COTTAGE


The following day Undine was up and out early in the morning, to see
if the forest stream was still flowing quietly within its banks. Now
the forest stream was the one haunted by her uncle Kühleborn, and
often he would use the waters for his own purposes. Sometimes
Kühleborn's purposes were kind, sometimes they were unkind.

Undine was, in the cottage again, preparing the morning meal, when
Huldbrand entered the kitchen. She greeted him brightly.

'My uncle Kühleborn has made the waters calm,' she cried. 'The stream
is gliding peaceful as of old through the forest. Neither in air nor
water are there spirits to molest us. Should you wish it, you can
journey homeward to-day.'

Huldbrand did not like to hear Undine speak of her strange kinsfolk,
yet so gentle was she, so full of grace, that he soon forgot his
vexation.

Together the knight and his wife went to the door of the cottage, and
looked out at the meadows and the lake lying in the morning sunshine.

'Why should we leave this quiet spot to-day?' said Huldbrand, for well
he loved the island where he had found his beautiful bride. 'In the
great world we will spend no gladder days than in this simple
meadow-land. Let us, then, yet linger here for a few days.'

'It shall be as you wish,' answered Undine. 'Yet will my
foster-parents grieve the more when I leave them, should they learn
that I have now a soul. To-day they only marvel that I am kind and
thoughtful, thinking that to-morrow I will once again be wild and
careless as of old. But should I dwell here much longer they will know
that never in the days to come will I be thoughtless as in former
days. For I cannot hide my new gift. They will hear it in my voice,
they will feel it in my touch, they will see it in my eyes. And having
known that now, at length, I could love them well, they would grieve
to lose me.'

'We will leave to-day, this very hour,' said the knight, so pleased
was he with Undine's new care for her kind old foster-parents.

The priest who had found shelter in the cottage was also ready to
return to his monastery. He would journey with the knight and his lady
until they were safe from the perils of the haunted wood.

Accordingly they sought the fisherman and his wife, and told them that
now they must leave the shelter of their cottage and journey toward
the city that lay beyond the forest.

The farewells were said and Huldbrand lifted his beautiful wife and
seated her on his horse. He himself would walk by her side.

The three travellers soon reached the leafy shades of the forest.

On one side of the lady walked the priest, clad in a long white robe,
while, guarding her on the other side, was, as I told you, the knight.
His armour was burnished and his sword was once more girt by his side.

As Huldbrand and Undine talked joyfully together, a stranger joined
the priest, yet they in their joy did not notice this.

The stranger wore a garment such as a monk might wear. The hood was
drawn forward and wellnigh hid his face, while the whole robe hung
loosely around him, in great folds, so that at each step he must
gather it up and throw it over his arm.

[Illustration: The three travellers soon reached the leafy shades of
the forest]

'I have lived in the forest for many years,' said the stranger to the
priest, 'and I love it for its great beauty. As I flit in and out
among the dark shadows of the trees, I play with the stray sunbeams as
they cast their glances here and there on my white robe.'

'Tell me your name, for I would fain know who you are,' said the
priest to his companion.

'Nay, tell me first who are you who ask?' said the stranger.

'Father Heilman is my name,' answered the priest, 'and I am journeying
back to my monastery, after an absence of many days.'

'Now I,' said the stranger, 'am named Lord Kühleborn, though sometimes
I am called Kühleborn the Free, for indeed I am free as the wild birds
of the air to go hither and thither as I will. Meanwhile, Sir Priest,
I bid you farewell, for I would speak to yonder lady.'

Even as he spoke, Kühleborn left the priest and came close up to
Undine. He bent forward as though he would whisper in her ear. But
Undine drew herself quickly away, crying as she saw who was by her
side, 'I no longer wish to have aught to do with you!'

But her uncle only laughed at her words.

'You are my niece,' he said, 'and I am here to guide you through the
forest. The goblins in the cavern beneath the earth might come forth
to do you harm were I not here to keep them quiet. The priest, who is
named Father Heilman, speaks to me more kindly than do you. Know you
not that it was I who brought him in safety to the little island to be
ready for your wedding-day?'

Undine and the knight turned to the priest, but he was walking as one
in deep thought, and had, it was easy to see, heard nothing that the
stranger had said.

Then Undine turned again to her uncle. 'See yonder,' she cried, 'I can
see already the end of the wood. We need your help no longer. I pray
you vanish and do not disturb us further.'

When Kühleborn saw that Undine really wished him to leave her, he was
angry. He made faces and shook his fist at his niece, until at length
she screamed, 'Huldbrand, Huldbrand, save me, I entreat you!'

The knight at once drew his sword and would have struck at the rude
stranger. But as he thrust in the direction of Kühleborn he felt a
waterfall come rushing down from a rock above him. He drew his wife
back, that she might not be drenched, but as he did so a white spray
was flung after them which wet them both to the skin. At that moment
they heard, as they thought, a low mocking laugh.

'It is strange,' said the priest, 'that the ripple of the stream
should sound almost as the voice of a man.'

To Huldbrand the stream still seemed to be speaking, and these were
the words he thought he heard. 'You were foolish, Sir Knight, to draw
your sword, yet will I not be angry with you, nor will I quarrel with
you so long as you guard well your beautiful wife. Yet be not again
thus hasty, Sir Knight.'

As the voice faded away into silence the travellers reached the end of
the wood. Before them was the city, glowing red in the rays of the
setting sun.




CHAPTER IX

THE KNIGHT RETURNS TO THE CITY


Now all this time the lady Bertalda had been very unhappy because of
the knight's long absence. Indeed, she had no sooner sent Huldbrand
forth into the haunted forest than she began to wish that she had kept
him by her side. As day after day passed and he did not return, she
grew fearful lest he had lost his way and perished in the mazes of the
wood. When a little later she heard of the floods that had made the
country around impassable, she wellnigh lost all hope of his return.

In spite of this, however, she begged the knights who had taken part
in the tournament to go in search of Huldbrand, but this they were
unwilling to do.

As for the knight's own servants, they would not leave the city
without their master, yet neither would they follow him into the
dreaded forest. They lingered on at an inn of the city, lamenting his
absence, but doing nought to bring him back.

It was now, when there seemed but little hope of his return, that
Huldbrand, to the surprise of every one, appeared in the city,
bringing with him a wife of wondrous beauty, as well as Father
Heilman, the priest who had married them.

Huldbrand's servants rejoiced to see their young master alive and
well. And the town folk, who had heard of his disappearance, were glad
that the light-hearted knight, who had always treated them with
courtesy, had suffered no harm in his adventure.

But the lady Bertalda, though she was glad that the knight had
returned, was sad when she saw that he had not come back alone. She
herself had loved him, and had hoped that, if ever he should return,
he would claim her as his bride.

Yet though Bertalda was sad, she was a wise maiden, and she received
Undine kindly, thinking that she was a princess whom Huldbrand had
rescued from a wicked wizard. For the true story of the beautiful
Undine was known to none, save to the knight alone.

As for Undine, she no sooner saw Bertalda than she loved her, and
begged her to stay in the city until she and her husband left it.
Nay, more, she even asked the maiden to promise to go with them when
they set out for the castle of Ringstetten, which stood on the banks
of the river Danube, and Bertalda was well pleased with this request.

One evening they three together walked up and down in the public
square. In the midst of the square stood a beautiful fountain, and
here they lingered to watch the water as it tumbled and tossed. So
violently did it do this that it seemed as though the fountain must
break, and the water, bursting its bonds, must flow away far and free.

At that moment a tall man came towards them from the market-place,
and, bowing to the knight and Bertalda, he drew the young wife aside
that he might speak to her alone.

Huldbrand looked at the stranger, and as he looked he felt sure that
he had seen him before. He grew a little angry, this hasty knight, as
he watched his wife and the stranger whispering together. He caught a
few words too, and they seemed to him to be in a foreign language, and
this displeased him yet more.

At this moment, however, Undine left the stranger. As she came toward
her husband she was laughing merrily and clapping her hands.

But the stranger, as she left him, shook his head and frowned. Then he
walked with great strides toward the fountain, and stepping into it he
vanished and was seen no more.

'It is Kühleborn, the spirit of the forest stream--I know him now,'
thought Huldbrand to himself.

But Bertalda seemed to see nothing unusual about the stranger. She
thought he was the Master of the fountain, and turning to Undine she
asked her what the man had said to make her laugh so gaily.

'The day after to-morrow is your birthday, dear Bertalda,' said
Undine. 'Wait only until then, and I will tell you the reason of my
joy.'

Then, saying farewell to Bertalda, Undine and the knight walked toward
their home.

'Was it Kühleborn who spoke to you by the fountain?' asked Huldbrand,
and his voice sounded cold, for he did not wish to be reminded of his
wife's strange relations.

'It was he,' answered Undine. 'He told me tidings that made me
rejoice. I will tell you without delay, should you desire it, what the
tidings were. Yet if you will but wait until Bertalda's birthday, you
will give me great pleasure, and you yourself will enjoy a great
surprise.'

Listening to her gentle words, the knight forgot the ill-humour he had
but lately felt, and willingly he agreed to wait until she herself
wished to tell him the good news.

And Undine, as she fell asleep that night, was smiling happily.
'Bertalda, dear Bertalda,' she murmured, 'how she will rejoice when I
tell her the tidings brought to me by him whom she calls the Master of
the fountain.'




CHAPTER X

THE BIRTHDAY FEAST


It had been Undine's wish to give a great banquet in honour of
Bertalda's birthday. The knight had ordered that all should be done as
she desired.

The feast was now spread, and the guests, of whom there were a great
number, had already taken their seats.

At the upper end of the table sat Bertalda, surrounded with flowers
and jewels, gifts these which her foster-parents and friends had
showered upon her. By her side sat the knight and his fair young wife.

When at length the fruit was placed on the table, the doors of the
banqueting-room were flung open. (In Germany, where the knight lived,
it was usual to do this that the peasant folk might look in and see
how their masters fared.) Wine and cakes were offered to those who on
this evening came to show their pleasure in the joy of the knight and
his young wife.

Huldbrand and Bertalda, meanwhile, were watching Undine with eager
eyes. Had she not a secret to tell them, which, when they knew it,
would make them even happier than before?

But Undine only smiled upon them as she caught their eyes, and shook
her head slightly as though to say, 'No, it is still too soon, too
soon.'

At this moment the guests begged the young mistress of the feast to
sing. She seemed pleased with the request, and taking her lute in her
hands, she began to play softly, while her clear voice filled the
room.

It was a song of sunshine and green grass, of sweet flowers and
sparkling waters, and the guests, listening spellbound, forgot all
else save the singer and her song.

But hark! the song is changing. Who is the child of whom Undine sings?
A child who has been borne by the waves far from the home of her
birth. The little one is lying like a flower among the meadow grass
(the guests can see her as the singer sings) and reaches out her tiny
hands for help.

Ah! now they hear the tramp, tramp of a horse. A noble duke is riding
slowly along. He halts, for he sees the little maid. He stoops and
lifts her in his arms, and carries her off to his own castle, and
surrounds her with splendour and with wealth.

And now tears gather in the eyes of the guests. The song is drawing to
a close, and Undine is singing of an unknown shore, where in a little
cottage sit a father and mother, desolate and sad, for they have lost
their little child, and they know not where to find her.

Among all the guests were none who listened to the song more eagerly
than Bertalda's noble foster-parents.

'She has sung the story of Bertalda, the little child we found so long
ago,' they said each to the other. 'It was even thus we found her in
the meadow, among the flowers.'

And Bertalda herself cried out in haste, 'Undine, Undine, you know my
parents, bring them to me, bring them to me, I entreat you!'

Then Undine, with tears that were tears of joy in her eyes, looked at
Bertalda, and said softly, 'They are here, your parents are here, dear
maiden, and when you see them you will rejoice. Well do I know the
tender care they will give to you, for it was even they who were my
own foster-parents.'

At a sign from Undine the old fisherman and his wife now stepped
forward from the corner in which their foster-child had bidden them
wait. It was she, Undine, who had sent for them that they might claim
Bertalda, who was, as Kühleborn told her, their child.

The eyes of all the guests were fixed in astonishment on the humble
fisherman and his wife. Could these poor working folk be indeed the
parents of the maiden who stood before them, so cold, so full of
pride?

'Yes, here is your long-lost daughter,' said Undine softly, as the old
people stood bewildered before Bertalda. Then they, taking courage
from her words, threw their arms around their daughter. And as they
embraced her, tears streamed down their old worn faces, while they
thanked God for His goodness in giving them back their child.

But Bertalda tore herself from their arms. She, the child of a poor
old fisherman and his wife! She could not believe it. She did not wish
to believe it. In her pride she had hoped to be known as the daughter
of a beautiful princess, or even of a queen. Now in her anger she
believed that Undine had brought the fisherman and his wife to the
banquet only to crush her pride and to humble her before Huldbrand and
his guests.

The angry maiden took no pains to hide her rage. She reproached
Undine, Undine who had only wished to give her joy, nor had she any
words too bitter to fling at the fisherman and his wife.

And Undine, who had hoped to make her friend and her foster-parents
happy, listened sadly, now to Bertalda, now to the old fisherman and
his wife.

'Bertalda,' she cried, 'Bertalda, do not be angry. Have you not a
soul? Let it teach you not to grieve your parents more.'

But Bertalda only grew more angry, and the poor parents, as they heard
her scorn, more sad.

As for the guests, they were talking loudly, some being sorry for the
maiden, others for the fisherman and his wife.

Then Undine begged the knight to let her speak to their guests. And he
yielding to her wish, she walked to the upper end of the table, and
while all eyes were fixed upon her, she spoke.

'My secret, which I thought would cause Bertalda joy, has caused her
sorrow. Yet must I tell you that I have spoken the truth. For he who
told me was he who, when Bertalda was but a little babe, drew her into
the water, and thereafter laid her in the green meadow through which
the duke rode toward his castle.'

'Do not listen to her words!' shouted Bertalda in her rage. 'She is a
witch, a witch!'

'Nay, I am no witch. Look upon me that you may know,' answered Undine.
And as they gazed upon her pure face and into her clear blue eyes, the
guests knew that she spoke the truth. Undine was not a witch.

'If she is not a witch, she at least has not told the truth,' cried
Bertalda, scorn in her cold voice. 'She has no proof that I am the
child of these wretched old people.' Then, turning to her noble
foster-parents, she entreated them to take her away at once from the
city, where such shame had been brought upon her.

But the duke did not move, while the duchess said in a firm voice, 'We
shall not leave this room, nor shall you, proud maiden, until we know
the truth.'

Then the fisherman's wife drew near to the noble lady, and curtsying
low she said, 'Should this bad maiden be indeed my daughter, as I do
think she is, she will have between her shoulders a mark like a
violet, and this mark also you will find on the instep of her left
foot. Let the maiden come with me that--'

But Bertalda rudely interrupted the old woman's words.

'I will not go with the peasant!' she said.

'But you will come with me into another room,' said the duchess, and
Bertalda knew that she would have to go. 'And the old woman shall come
with us,' added the noble lady in a kind voice.

As the three went out of the banqueting-room, silence fell upon the
guests. Now they would soon know the truth.

Slowly the moments passed. At length the door opened and the duchess
returned with Bertalda and the old woman. Bertalda looked pale and
frightened.

'It is but just,' said the noble lady, looking round the room, 'it is
but just that you should know the truth. It is as our hostess has
said. Bertalda is indeed the daughter of the fisherman and his wife.'

The duke and duchess then left the room, followed by their
foster-child, the duke bidding Bertalda's true parents come with them
also.

In silence the other guests slipped away, to talk in their own homes
over all that they had heard and seen, and Undine, left alone with her
husband, wept bitterly.




CHAPTER XI

THE JOURNEY TO CASTLE RINGSTETTEN


The knight did all he could to comfort his wife, and although he was
sorry to see her tears, he was glad to think that she, who had been so
wild and wilful, had now a soul so kind and loving.

'If it is true that Undine has won through love a soul, it is one more
pure than mortals know,' he thought to himself.

As he comforted his wife Huldbrand made up his mind to take her away
from the city as soon as possible.

In the city the lady Bertalda was well known, and people talked of the
strange story of her birth. But among them all none was heard to say
an unkind word about Undine, while many there were who blamed Bertalda
for her cruel behaviour toward her friend and the poor old fisherman
and his wife. But this neither the knight nor his lady knew, nor
would it have comforted Undine had she been told.

The morning after the feast a beautiful carriage stood at the door.
Huldbrand and his wife were ready to set out on their journey to the
castle of Ringstetten.

As the knight and Undine were stepping into the carriage a fisher-girl
drew near, and begged them to buy her fish.

'We are leaving the city, we do not need any fish,' said the knight
courteously. But at the sound of his voice the girl burst into tears,
and Huldbrand saw with surprise that it was Bertalda who had spoken to
him.

'Why do you weep so bitterly?' asked Undine, drawing Bertalda into the
house, and the maiden, who had no pride left, told her story.

'My foster-parents,' she said between her sobs, 'my foster-parents are
so displeased with my cruel behaviour to you and to the old fisherman
and his wife, that they no longer wish me to live with them. They have
given me a large sum of money and have sent me away into the wide
world. The fisherman and his wife, to whom they have also given gifts,
have gone back to their cottage by the lake. I was too fearful to wish
to be left alone in the world, and fain would I have gone with them to
their simple home, but he who is said to be my father--'

[Illustration: At the sound of his voice the girl burst into tears]

'In truth he is your father,' interrupted Undine, and her voice was
grave.

'Even if he be my father,' answered Bertalda, 'yet would he not take
me with him to his cottage. Did I care for him or for his wife, he
said, I would not fear to journey alone through the haunted forest,
until I found my home. Nor would he welcome me should I go to him
dressed in aught save the dress of a fisher-girl. Although the thought
of the forest makes me tremble, yet will I do as he has said. But
first I have come to you, gentle lady,' and as she spoke Bertalda
looked entreatingly at Undine, 'I have come to ask your forgiveness
for my behaviour yesterday. I believe that you did indeed wish to give
me joy by bringing my poor parents to the feast. O forgive me, forgive
all the bold and unkind words I spoke, for indeed I am very unhappy.'

But the gentle Undine would let the miserable maiden say no more. She
threw her arms around Bertalda's neck, and said, 'Bertalda, dear
Bertalda, you shall live with me and be my sister. You shall come with
me to Ringstetten this very day.'

The maiden dried her tears and looked timidly at the knight. He also
felt sorry for Bertalda, nor did it please him to think of her
venturing alone into the forest. Too well he knew the terrors which
might surround her there. He took her hand, as he saw her timid look,
and said in a gentle voice, 'You shall live with us at Ringstetten,
and I and my wife will take care of you. But lest the good old
fisherman is troubled as the days pass and you do not reach the
cottage, I will send to tell him that you have come with us and are
safe at Castle Ringstetten.' Then, giving Bertalda his arm, he placed
her in the carriage with Undine. The knight himself mounted his horse
and rode along gaily by their side, and soon they left the city and
all sad thoughts behind.

At length, one fair summer evening, the travellers reached
Ringstetten. There was much to make the knight busy after his long
absence, and thus it was that Undine and Bertalda spent many days
alone together. Often they would walk in the beautiful country which
lay without the castle grounds.

One day, as they wandered along the banks of the river Danube, a tall
man came toward them, and would have spoken to Undine. But Undine,
gentle as were her ways, had no welcome for the stranger. When she saw
him, a frown crossed her sweet face and she bid him at once begone.
Shaking his head the tall man yet obeyed, and walking with hasty steps
toward a little wood, he soon disappeared.

'Is not the stranger he who spoke to you in the city, the Master of
the fountain?' cried Bertalda fearfully. She would always be afraid of
the man who had told Undine the secret of her birth.

'Fear nothing, dear Bertalda,' said Undine hastily, 'the Master of the
fountain shall not do you harm. I will tell you who he is, and then
you will no longer be afraid. His name is Kühleborn and he is my
uncle. It was he who carried you away from your mother's arms and put
me there in your place.'

Then, as Bertalda listened with wide open eyes, Undine told her of her
childhood's home in the crystal palace under the blue sea, and of the
free and careless life she had lived in the cottage by the lake. She
told her, too, of the coming of the knight, and of their wedding-day,
when she had won for herself a soul, a gift given to no Undine save
through the power of love.

Bertalda listened to the strange story in silence, but as she listened
she felt a faint feeling of dread creep into her heart. And the
feeling grew and grew until at last it seemed to stand as a wall
between her and the gentle Undine.

At supper that evening she began to be sorry for the knight, who had
married a lady beautiful indeed and good, yet one who seemed to belong
to another world than theirs.




CHAPTER XII

CASTLE RINGSTETTEN


Now as the days passed, a change crept over those who dwelt in the
castle.

Huldbrand saw that Bertalda seemed to shrink away from his beautiful
wife. And when at length he asked her the reason that she no longer
loved Undine so well as she had been used to do, she told him that she
now knew from whence his wife had come. 'And for the spirit world,'
said Bertalda, 'I do not care, for I know it not. It and those who
have dwelt there fill me with fear and dread.'

Little by little the knight himself began to look at his wife with
less loving eyes, little by little he began to shun her presence.

Then Undine, seeing that her husband's love grew less, wept, and the
knight, seeing her tears, would speak kindly to her, yet even as he
spoke he would leave her side to walk with Bertalda.

She, Bertalda, meanwhile grew once more rude and proud, nor could
Undine's patience win her to behave more wisely.

Then in the long dark passages of the old castle, spectres began to
appear to Huldbrand and Bertalda, and worse than any was the tall form
of Kühleborn, or the Master of the fountain, as the maiden still
called him.

Now one day, when Huldbrand had ridden to the hunt, Undine gathered
all her servants together in the court of the castle and bade them
bring a big stone to cover up the fountain which stood in the middle
of the square.

The servants, who loved their mistress, hastened to obey her commands.
A huge stone was carried into the court, and was just about to be
placed on the fountain when Bertalda came hurriedly to the spot.

'The fountain must not be closed,' she cried haughtily, 'for it is
from it that water is drawn for my daily bath.'

But Undine, who on other days had often given way to the wishes of
Bertalda, was to-day determined that her will should be done.

'It is I who am mistress of the castle in the absence of my lord,' she
said, and her voice was firm though it was kind, 'and the fountain
shall be closed as I have commanded.'

'But look,' cried Bertalda angrily, 'the water itself bubbles and
heaves as though disturbed at the thought of being shut out from the
glad sunshine.'

The water was indeed, as the maiden said, fretting against the stones
and throwing out sudden jets as though in a violent passion.

The more excited grew the water, however, the more determined grew
Undine to have her order fulfilled, and that without delay.

As for the servants, they had no wish to please the haughty Bertalda,
they were even glad to disobey her when that might be.

Accordingly they no longer delayed to do the will of their gentle
mistress, and the stone was soon placed securely over the opening of
the fountain. Undine then bent over it and silently wrote on the top
of the stone some strange letters.

That evening, when Huldbrand came home, Bertalda met him with tears in
her eyes, and complained to him of his wife's strange conduct.

'Tell me why you have ordered that the fountain should be sealed,'
said the knight, turning sullenly to his wife. 'It was a strange
deed.'

'I will tell you the reason when we are alone,' said Undine. 'It was
a grave one indeed.'

'It matters not if Bertalda should hear,' said the knight, and he did
not hide the impatience that he felt.

'I will tell you in her presence if you so desire,' said Undine, 'but
I beseech you, desire it not.'

As the knight looked into her pleading face and let her sweet voice
steal into his heart, he grew ashamed of himself. How could he ever be
unkind to so fair, so good a wife!

Thinking thus Huldbrand did not speak, but he drew Undine gently from
the room, that she might speak to him alone as she wished to do.

'Ah, now I can tell you,' said Undine, and she smiled in her content.
'You know that Kühleborn, my uncle, has begun to haunt the castle. I
send him away in my displeasure, yet again and again he returns. Now I
have shut the door by which he comes, and here he will disturb our
peace no more. It is true that the stone can easily be raised by
strong men, in spite of the letters which I wrote upon it. If you wish
to do as Bertalda demands, remove the stone, yet do I warn you that
Kühleborn may well harm the maiden, for against her he bears more
ill-will than he does against others.'

Once more, as Huldbrand listened to his wife, he was ashamed. So
gentle was she, so kind to the haughty maiden who but mocked at her
for all her love. Peerless indeed was the soul of his beautiful wife,
and once again love for her sprang up within his heart.

'The stone shall not be removed, nor shall anything that you order be
undone, my sweet Undine,' said the knight.

At these words, and yet more at the kindness of his voice, Undine
rejoiced. Then, seizing Huldbrand's hand, she begged him to grant her
one request.

'If at any time, in the days that are to come,' she said, 'you upbraid
me, promise that this you will never do while we are sailing or while
we are near to sea or lake or tiny rivulet. For should one of my race
hear you use harsh words toward me, then would they regain their
power, and snatch me away from you for ever. Then would I be forced to
dwell all the rest of my life in the crystal palace below the blue
sea. Nor could I ever come up to you unless, indeed, I was sent by my
kindred, when alas! only great sadness would befall us both. Promise
me, therefore, that when we are near water, you will remember what I
have now told you.'

Huldbrand promised, and hand in hand they went in search of Bertalda.

She meanwhile had called together some workmen, and as she saw the
knight and Undine drawing near, she gave her orders to the men in a
loud, discontented voice. 'The stone may now be removed. Hasten, see
that it be done immediately!'

But the knight was angry with the maiden for daring thus to give what
orders she pleased, and he shouted at once, so that the workmen might
hear, 'The stone shall stay where it is! It shall not be removed!'

And the men went away, well pleased that they need not undo what their
gentle mistress had ordered to be done.

Huldbrand then reproved Bertalda for her rude behaviour to his wife,
but she scarcely heard his words, as she turned away in anger and
hastened to her room.

Soon supper was placed on the table, but Huldbrand and Undine waited
in vain for Bertalda. At length they sent a servant to call her, but
the maid came back only to tell them that she was nowhere to be found.
In her room, however, a letter had been left addressed to the knight.
Huldbrand opened it hastily and read:--

'Forgive me, Sir Knight, that I have forgotten that I am only a poor
fisher-girl. I will go to my father's miserable cottage, where I
cannot well commit the same fault again. Fare you well, you and your
beautiful wife.'

'You must go without delay to seek her and bring her back,' said
Undine.

And Huldbrand did not need to be urged. Already he had ordered his
horse to be saddled that he might ride after the maiden.

In vain he asked the servants in what direction Bertalda had gone. No
one had seen her. It was only as the knight impatiently mounted his
steed, that a page ran up to him crying, 'The lady Bertalda rode
toward the Black Valley.'

Without a pause the knight darted off in the direction of the valley.
He did not hear his wife's voice crying after him, 'Huldbrand,
Huldbrand, go not there, not to the valley, Huldbrand, or, if go you
must, take me, I entreat of you.'

Then when Undine saw that her cry was unheard, she ordered her palfrey
to be saddled instantly, and mounting it, she rode forth alone to
follow the knight into the Black Valley.




CHAPTER XIII

THE BLACK VALLEY


The Black Valley was a gloomy place. Fir-trees grew tall and dark on
the banks of the stream, casting strange shadows on the sunny waters.

As the knight entered the valley, evening had fallen and the stream
rushed, dark and sullen, between the rocks.

Huldbrand glanced anxiously from side to side, but no trace could be
found of the maiden whom he sought. He began to fear lest already she
were in peril, and thinking thus he urged his horse yet further into
the valley.

Peering through the bushes as he rode, he at length caught sight of
something white lying on the ground. Had he found Bertalda at last?

He spurred his horse onward toward the white gleam which had caught
his eye, but the animal no sooner saw the object which had gladdened
his master's eye than it started violently and refused to move. Then
the knight dismounted, and tying his now rearing steed to an elm, he
pushed his way on foot through the brushwood.

Thunder began to rumble around the mountains, and the evening dew fell
cold and damp on the anxious knight.

He could still see the white figure lying on the ground, but as he
drew nearer to it a strange dread struck at Huldbrand's heart.

'Was Bertalda asleep,' he wondered, 'or did she lie there unconscious,
perchance even dead?'

He was close to her now, bending over her. She never stirred. He
rustled the branches, rattled his sword. Still she lay there quiet,
motionless. He called her by her name, 'Bertalda!' but no voice
answered him. He called again, more loud, 'Bertalda!' but only a
sorrowful echo answered his cry.

Then the knight bent nearer yet to the maiden, but darkness hid the
face on which he longed to gaze.

Suddenly the whole valley was bright as at mid-day. A vivid flash of
lightning showed to Huldbrand the face over which he bent.

It was a terrible face. And a voice, awful as the face, rang out harsh
and hollow.

With a cry of terror the knight sprang away from the horrid vision.
But was it a vision? Huldbrand knew that it was creeping after him,
and he could catch some muttered words. 'Get you gone, get you gone,'
he heard, 'there are evil spirits abroad. Get you gone, or I shall
seize you and hold you fast,' and the white figure stretched out his
bony arms to catch him. Ah! now the knight knew who it was that had
given him so cruel a fright. It was none other than Kühleborn, the
malicious water spirit.

Seizing his sword, Huldbrand struck fiercely at the white figure, only
however to see it vanish, while a heavy shower of water drenched him
from head to foot.

'He may wish to drive me away, but he shall not succeed in doing so,'
murmured the knight. 'Bertalda shall not be left to the vengeance of
this evil spirit.'

Huldbrand now turned back to go to his horse, but ere he reached the
animal, he heard in the distance a sound of weeping. It reached his
ears even though the thunder still rolled and the wind still blew. He
hastened towards the spot from which the sound seemed to come. There,
on the hillside, trying to climb up out of the darkness of the valley,
he found Bertalda.

The maiden was too glad to see Huldbrand to remember how but lately he
had angered her. She clung to him, calling him her deliverer, her
knight, for to her too the valley had been full of horrible forms and
strange visions.

Soothing her with kind words, Huldbrand led the maiden toward his
horse.

But no sooner did the animal see his master approach with Bertalda on
his arm than it began to rear, beating the air madly with its
forefeet.

It was not possible to mount Bertalda, and the knight soon gave up the
attempt. He drew the horse gently forward by the bridle, while with
his other arm he supported the fearful maiden.

But Bertalda, though she was anxious to escape from the dark valley,
could walk but slowly, and at each step her strength grew less. For
Kühleborn had played her many pranks ere she had been found. The storm
also had bruised her slender form.

At length she slipped from the knight's arm, and falling on the grass,
she sighed, 'Leave me, noble knight, leave me to suffer the punishment
I deserve.'

'I will never leave you, dear Bertalda,' cried the knight. As he
spoke, the steed began to plunge even more furiously than before. It
was impossible for Huldbrand to control the animal. All he could do
was to force it away a few paces from where the maiden lay, for he
feared lest the horse should trample her to death.

He had gone but a few steps when he heard her calling to him,
'Huldbrand, Huldbrand, leave me not alone,' for already all her
courage had faded away.

As he hesitated, the knight heard the wheels of a wagon rumble slowly
over the rough road that led through the valley. He at once called to
the driver to come to his help. A man's voice called back quickly,
'Have but patience, and I will come.'

Soon afterwards Huldbrand saw two white horses appear through the
trees. Then a wagon covered with a great white hood was to be seen,
and last of all the driver, who was dressed in a white carter's frock.

The driver drew near to the knight and tried to help him to quiet his
frightened steed.

'Do you know, Sir Knight, why your good horse shivers thus?' asked the
carter, 'for if not I can tell you. A bad water spirit dwells in this
valley, and often he would bewitch my horses when first I ventured
through it. But now I have learned a little spell. If you wish it, I
will whisper it in the ear of your steed, and he will stand steady as
my greys.'

'You may try your spell,' said the knight, 'though I fear that it will
be of but little use.'

Then the driver of the wagon went quietly up to the panting steed, and
said a few words to it. At once the horse stood still, without a trace
of the fear which had made it so restless and unmanageable.

Huldbrand had no time to wonder what the wagoner had said to his
horse. He was too eager to get Bertalda out of the valley to think of
anything else.

'My wagon will take the fair lady safely back to Ringstetten,' said
the wagoner. 'She may sit in it in comfort, for it is filled with bags
of the softest cotton.'

The knight was glad to accept this offer, and as his horse, though
quiet, was tired and weary, Huldbrand himself was easily persuaded
that he also should ride in the wagon with Bertalda, while his steed
was fastened behind.

'It is well,' said the wagoner, 'that the road is downhill. My trusty
greys will step out bravely.'

Thus they started, the driver walking by the side of his wagon.

And Bertalda and the knight did not heed the jolting of the wagon, as
they sat side by side on the soft bags of cotton.

Suddenly they were startled by a loud shout from the driver.

'Steady, now, my trusty greys, steady, lest you fall.'

Already the wagon was in the midst of a stream of rushing water, and
it seemed as though the horses must be carried off their feet. The
wagoner had sprung into the wagon untouched by the swirling waters.

'This is a strange way by which to drive us,' said Huldbrand to the
wagoner. 'It seems to go right into the middle of the stream.'

'Nay, now, Sir Knight,' laughed the driver, 'if you look again, you
will see that it is the stream which is rushing across our path. See,
it has overflowed its banks.'

The knight looked and saw that the whole valley was being rapidly
flooded. Then, all at once, he knew that this was Kühleborn's doing.

'It is Kühleborn,' he cried aloud, 'Kühleborn the water spirit, who is
doing his utmost to drown us. Do you not know a spell against his
power?'

'Yea, by my troth I know a spell,' answered the wagoner, 'but ere I
use it, I must tell you who I am.'

'I care not who you may be,' shouted the angry knight. 'See you not
that there is no time to lose. The water is rising rapidly.'

'Nevertheless,' answered the man,' you shall hear my name, for I am
Kühleborn!'

He laughed a mocking laugh, and at that moment the wagon seemed to
disappear, and Bertalda and the knight were struggling in the flood.
Above them rose the wagoner, who was indeed, as he had said,
Kühleborn. Taller and taller he towered above them, until he seemed at
last to change into a great white wave.

With horror-stricken eyes the maiden and the knight saw the wave swoop
down upon the noble steed, which had been vainly struggling in the
water. Then slowly once more the wave reared itself higher and higher
yet above the heads of the two who watched and waited until they too
should be for ever buried beneath the waters.

But ere the great white wave rolled down upon them, they were saved.
Through the tumult of the waters a sweet voice floated to Bertalda and
the knight. Then, as the moon broke through the clouds, they saw
Undine on a hill looking down into the valley.

She rebuked the waters, she even threatened the vast wave that towered
above Bertalda and the knight, until muttering gloomily it vanished
from their sight.

As the waters ran more quietly through the valley, Undine flew to them
swiftly as a bird and drew them up out of reach of the water. Bidding
them rest a while, for they were weary, she went a little way off to
fetch her white palfrey. Then, telling the knight to place Bertalda on
the saddle, she led them safely back to the castle.




CHAPTER XIV

HULDBRAND FORGETS HIS PROMISE


Undine was full of joy when she had saved Bertalda and Huldbrand from
the dangers of the Black Valley, and brought them back safely to
Castle Ringstetten. Her joy grew daily greater as her husband became
kind and gentle to her as he had used to be when they dwelt together
in the cottage by the lake. Indeed the knight had grown ashamed of his
careless words and ways. He would never again speak harshly to Undine
or leave her side to spend long hours with Bertalda; so he thought to
himself. For when she had hastened to save him and the maiden from the
doom which had all but overtaken them, he had seen once more, in a
flash, the soul of his beautiful young wife. It shone before him now,
fair and spotless in its beauty.

Bertalda, too, had been touched by the goodness of her friend. She no
longer wished to mock her gentle words, and though her heart was
cold, she grew more humble.

Thus trouble and care passed away from Ringstetten, and spectres no
longer haunted the dark corners of the castle.

Winter came, cold and chill, but it had no power to freeze the hearts
of Undine and the knight.

Spring came, and the trees grew green, and the sky shone more blue,
and the little birds began to use their wings. Soon the swallows and
the storks came home from their long winter journeys. And those in the
castle, as they thought of the fair countries these had seen, began
themselves to wish to travel.

One beautiful evening Huldbrand with his wife and Bertalda walked
along the banks of the river Danube. The knight, who had ofttimes
sailed down the river, told them tales of the wonderful countries
through which it flowed, and of the beautiful town of Vienna, which
rose so proudly on its banks.

'Ah!' said Bertalda, 'how I wish we might sail to this city of which
you tell.'

And Undine, ever anxious to give pleasure to her friend, said, 'Yes,
let us visit Vienna while the spring is still fair.' Huldbrand also
was pleased at the thought of the journey, only once he bent toward
Undine and whispered, 'Kühleborn, will we not be in his power if we
sail down the river?'

His beautiful wife only laughed. She was too happy now to fear her
uncle's power.

They therefore got ready for the journey with much merriment and many
hopes.

When at length the three travellers, with their attendants, set out on
their voyage, it seemed as though all would be as joyful as they had
wished. As they sailed on, the river grew more broad, more green the
grasses too in the rich meadow-lands.

But erelong a shadow crept across their joy. The river, indeed, flowed
smooth as before, the country smiled only more graciously upon the
travellers, but Kühleborn had already begun to show that on this part
of the river he could use his power.

Undine, it is true, reproved her uncle before he had done more than
play a few tricks upon them. Yet though he would cease his pranks when
she spoke, it was but a few moments before he was as troublesome as
ever.

Soon the crew began to crowd together, whispering fearfully and
glancing timidly at the knight and his fair ladies. Kühleborn was
making them afraid.

Huldbrand saw their strange glances and he began to grow angry. He
even muttered crossly, 'This is Undine's mad uncle come to disturb us.
I would her strange kindred would leave us alone.'

Thinking thus, the knight looked with displeasure at his poor wife.
She knew but too well what his glance meant, and worn out with sorrow
and with her constant watch over Kühleborn, she at length fell fast
asleep.

But no sooner were her eyes closed than her uncle again began his
tiresome tricks.

It seemed to the sailors, and indeed to all on board, that they were
bewitched, for look which way each one would, there before him,
peering out of the water, was the head of a very ugly man.

Each man turned, in his terror, to point out to his fellow the hideous
head. But on every face the same horror was already painted. Then when
each tried to tell the other what each one had seen, they ended by
crying out together, 'See, here is the face! nay, look, it is here!'

Undine awoke as the terrified crew broke into loud screams, and as she
opened her eyes the ugly faces vanished.

But Huldbrand had not been frightened. He had been growing more and
more angry, and now he would have spoken roughly to his wife, had she
not pleaded with loving eyes and soft voice, 'For God's sake, rebuke
me not while we are on the water. Bethink you of your promise.'

The knight was silent, for well he remembered how Undine had entreated
him never to reprove her while she was near water.

Then she, seeing he was silent, whispered, 'Let us give up this
voyage, for now has our joy turned into sadness. Let us go back to the
castle where nothing can disturb us.'

Huldbrand, however, was not to be so easily restored to good humour.
He answered her crossly, 'Why should I have to stay shut up at home?
Even there can I have quiet only so long as the fountain remains
sealed. I wish that your foolish kinsfolk--'

He could say no more, for Undine's hand was over his lips, and her
voice was beseeching him to be silent.

Meanwhile Bertalda sat quietly in the ship, thinking of all the
strange things that had happened. As she sat thus thinking, she
unfastened a golden necklace which the knight had given to her, and
holding it in her hand over the side of the bark she drew it
carelessly through the water. Then dreamily she watched it as it
gleamed and glistened in the light of the setting sun.

All at once a huge white hand came up out of the river, seized the
necklace, and disappeared with it below the water.

Bertalda shrieked in terror, and a mocking laugh answered her cry.

Then could the anger of the knight no longer be concealed. He sprang
up, shouting to the water spirits to claim no kinship with him, but to
come and learn from his sword-thrusts how much he hated them.

The maiden meanwhile wept for her lost necklace. But Undine had thrust
her hand into the water, and was murmuring strange words to herself,
stopping from time to time to say to her husband, 'Chide me not here,
Huldbrand, chide me not here, lest you lose me for ever.'

And, indeed, though the knight shook with rage, yet he spoke no word
of reproach to his wife.

At length Undine drew out the hand which she had been holding under
the water, and in it she held a coral necklace of wondrous beauty.

'Take it and weep no longer,' she said in her gentle voice, and she
held the necklace out toward Bertalda. 'I have had it brought to me
from the palaces below the sea. Grieve no longer for the one which you
have lost.'

But the knight saw in the necklace only another sign of Undine's
strange dealings with the water spirits. He sprang between Bertalda
and his wife and snatched from Undine's hand the beautiful necklace,
flinging it far away into the river. Then in his passion he turned to
his wife, and cried, 'Go and abide with your kindred! You are a witch,
go, dwell with those who are as you are, and take with you your gifts!
Go, trouble us no more!'

Undine looked at Huldbrand. Tears were in her blue eyes, and she wept
as a little blameless child might weep.

'Alas, beloved,' she sighed, 'farewell! No harm shall touch you while
I have power to shield you from evil. Alas, alas! why have you sent me
hence?'

She seemed to glide as she spoke over the edge of the bark, and be
drawn down into the river. And the little waves lapped against the
boat and seemed to sob as they whispered, 'Alas, alas!'

No sooner had the knight spoken than he knew what he had done. He had
lost his wife, his beautiful fair-souled Undine. He lay on the deck
stretching out empty arms, shedding bitter tears, until at length his
misery made the strong man swoon.

[Illustration: The little waves seemed to sob as they whispered,
'Alas! alas!']




CHAPTER XV

HULDBRAND AND BERTALDA


When he recovered, the knight of Ringstetten went back to his castle
with Bertalda. So bitterly did he mourn the loss of his gentle wife,
that at length he began to believe that he would never cease to weep
for her. Bertalda wept by his side, and for a long time they lived
quietly together, thinking and talking of none save the beautiful
Undine.

But as the months passed by, Huldbrand began to think a little less
and yet a little less of his beautiful lost wife.

Now about this time the old fisherman appeared at the castle. He had
come to tell the knight that it was time that his daughter Bertalda
should come to live with him in his lonely cottage by the lake.

Then the knight began to think how strange and silent it would be in
the castle if Bertalda left him. The more he thought about it the
more he disliked the thought of being left alone.

At length he spoke to the fisherman and begged him not to take
Bertalda away. 'Let her stay with me and be my wife,' said the knight.

And in time the fisherman yielded to the wishes of the knight, and the
wedding-day was fixed.

Then a letter was sent to Father Heilman, begging him to come without
delay to the castle that he might perform the wedding-rite between the
knight and the lady Bertalda. Now Father Heilman was the very priest
who had wedded Huldbrand to Undine in the cottage by the lake.

When the priest had read Huldbrand's letter he hastened at once to the
castle.

Huldbrand and Bertalda were sitting side by side under the trees, the
fisherman near them, when they saw the priest enter the court.

They all rose eagerly to welcome him, but Father Heilman began to
speak without delay.

'Sir Knight, I have come with as great haste as my old limbs would
carry me to tell you that I do not believe the beautiful Undine is
dead. Last night and for many nights before, she was with me in my
dreams, wringing her white hands, and crying, "Ah, holy Father, I
live, I live. Let not Huldbrand forget me, for should he wed again
great danger may, alas, come to him, nor will I have power to shield
him. Help me, therefore, holy Father." What the dream meant I knew not
until your letter reached me. Now have I come, not to marry you to
Bertalda, but to tell you that Undine, your wife, is yet alive.'

The knight himself, as well as Bertalda and the fisherman, believed in
their hearts that what the priest said was true, yet would they not
own that they believed his words. Even the old fisherman, who so
dearly loved his foster-child, thought that as the marriage with
Bertalda had been arranged, it were well it should take place without
more delay.

They all, therefore, refused to listen to the priest, when he
reproached them for their conduct. They even told him, what was not
really true, that they did not believe his foolish dreams.

Sadly shaking his head, the priest left the castle. He saw that should
he speak again no one would listen to his words. Nor would he linger
to taste any of the refreshments that were placed before him. He had
failed to make any one believe his dream, and he was too sad to eat.

The following morning the knight sent to the nearest monastery for a
priest, who promised to wed him to Bertalda in a few days.




CHAPTER XVI

BERTALDA'S WEDDING


The wedding-day dawned bright and clear, the guests assembled in the
castle and wore their gayest garments, yet over everything there
brooded a dark cloud. It seemed to the knight, as well as to his
guests, that some one was missing from the feast, and the thoughts of
all turned to the beautiful Undine.

The bride seemed happier than any one else, yet even she knew a cloud
was in her sky.

Slowly the hours of the wedding-day dragged on, but at length the
ceremony was over, the feast ended, and the guests ready to depart.

When they had gone, Bertalda, thinking to dispel the gloom which had
now fallen upon her spirit, told her maids to spread out before her
all her rich jewels and gorgeous robes. She would choose to-night the
garments in which she would array herself on the morrow.

Her waiting-maids did as they were told, and when the dresses and
jewels were spread out before their new mistress, they began to
flatter her and tell her that none was fairer than she.

Bertalda listened with pleasure to their praises. Then looking at
herself in the mirror she sighed. 'Alas, but see these little brown
spots that have appeared on my neck.'

The maids saw indeed, as their mistress said, that there were freckles
on her neck, but still they flattered her, saying that the little
spots only made her skin look the whiter.

But Bertalda did not believe their words. She wanted to get rid of the
freckles that had only lately appeared on her slender throat.

'Had I but water from the fountain, the spots would vanish in a day,'
she cried pettishly.

Then one of Bertalda's maids thought to herself, 'My mistress shall
have the water she so much desires,' and laughing gaily to herself,
she slipped from the room.

In but a few moments heavy footsteps were heard in the court below.
The footsteps tramped backward and forward.

Bertalda, looking from her window, smiled, for she saw that the noisy
steps were those of workmen, who were busy removing the stone which
had been placed over the fountain. She guessed that this was the doing
of one of her maids, but she still smiled contentedly. The freckles
would not spoil her beauty for another day. The water from the
fountain would make them disappear, and that was all she cared about
just then.

At first the workmen tried in vain to remove the stone. Perhaps some
of them, remembering that their sweet young mistress Undine had
ordered it to be placed there, did not try very hard to lift it from
its place. All at once, however, the stone began to move. It almost
seemed as though it were being pushed up from beneath. It moved
slowly, then seemed to rise up into the air, after which it rolled on
to the pavement with a tremendous crash.

Then slowly, slowly there rose out of the mouth of the well a white
figure, veiled and weeping. And those who gazed spellbound at the
sight saw that the figure which stepped from the fountain was that of
a woman. Weeping and wringing her hands, she walked slowly,
sorrowfully toward the castle.

The workmen now fled in terror from the court, while Bertalda with her
maids still gazed from her window at the pale shadowy figure. As it
passed beneath her window it looked upward, sobbing pitifully, and
the bride saw under the veil the sweet sad face of the mistress of the
castle, Undine.

Bertalda called aloud to her maids to go fetch the knight, her
husband, but not one was found with courage to go in search of him.

On and on went the wanderer slowly, as though she would fain turn
backward, on and up the stairs she knew so well, through the long
quiet passages, and as she walked her tears fell yet more fast.

In a room at the end of the long passages stood the knight. A torch
burnt dully by his side. As he stood there thinking of the days that
had passed away for ever, he heard steps coming slowly along the
passage. He listened, and, as he listened, the slow footsteps halted
outside his door.

Soft fingers tapped, and then very gently the door was opened, and
Huldbrand, standing before a long mirror, saw, without turning, a
white-veiled figure enter and close the door.

'The stone has been taken away from the fountain, and I have come to
you and you must die,' said a soft voice.

Ah, it was Undine, his beautiful lost Undine, who had come back to
him. How he longed to see her face, yet how he feared to have the veil
removed lest she should have changed since last he gazed upon her.

[Illustration: Slowly, slowly there rose out of the mouth of the well
a white figure]

'If you are beauteous as in days gone by, if in your eyes I may see
your soul tender as of old, draw aside your veil, that as I die I may
gaze upon you,' faltered the knight.

Silently Undine threw back her veil, and Huldbrand saw her, fair as on
the day he had won her for his bride. As he looked upon her, he knew
that he had never loved any one in all the wide world as he loved
Undine.

He bent toward the sweet face. Then Undine, kissing the knight, drew
him into her arms and wept. And as she wept the tears flowed into his
very heart and he also wept. Softly she laid him on his couch, and
with her arms around him, Huldbrand died.

Then sorrowfully Undine raised herself from the couch, and sorrowfully
she passed from the chamber.

'My tears fell on his heart until, for very sorrow, it broke,' she
said, as she glided, a pale veiled figure, through the terrified
servants.

And some who dared to follow her saw that she went slowly down toward
the fountain.




CHAPTER XVII

THE BURIAL


Now when Father Heilman heard that the knight was dead, he hastened to
the castle to comfort Bertalda. The priest, who but the day before had
married the maiden to the knight, had already fled from the haunted
house.

But Father Heilman found that the haughty spirit of the bride needed
no comfort. She was more angry with Undine than sorrowful that she had
lost the knight. Indeed, as she thought of the strange way in which
Huldbrand had been snatched away from her, she cried aloud, 'Why did
Huldbrand bring a water spirit to his home? She is worse than a
mermaiden, she is a witch, a sorceress!'

Then the old fisherman, who heard her cruel words, hushed her, saying,
'It was God's will that Huldbrand should die, and Undine alone,
forsaken, weeps for his death in great sorrow of soul.'

But if Father Heilman was not needed to comfort Bertalda, his presence
was wanted at the burial of the knight.

Not far off there was a little village church to which the lord of
Ringstetten and others of his race had given gifts. It was arranged
that in the churchyard the knight should be laid to rest.

His shield and helmet were laid on his coffin and would be buried with
him, for the knight of Ringstetten had left no son to bear them in the
years that were to come.

On the day that had been fixed the mourners walked slowly toward the
churchyard, Father Heilman in front carrying a crucifix.

Then slowly a figure clad in snow-white garments, and wringing her
hands in great sorrow, came to join the mourners, who all wore black
clothes as a sign of their grief. Those who noticed the white-veiled
figure drew closer together, terror-stricken. Others, seeing them thus
fearful, turned to see the reason of their fear, and soon these too
drew aside, for the white-robed figure was in their very midst.

Seeing the confusion among the mourners, some soldiers, trying to be
brave, as was their duty, spoke to the white-robed figure and even
tried to drive her away. But she glided quickly past them and followed
onward, still toward the little church.

The maids who were walking close to Bertalda saw that the white-veiled
figure would soon be by their side, and they, lest she should harm
them, drew back, so that it was easy for the shadowy form to keep
close to the new-made bride.

Softly, noiselessly she moved, so noiselessly that Bertalda neither
heard nor saw the phantom figure.

At length the mourners reached the churchyard and gathered around the
grave. Then Bertalda, looking up, saw the white-veiled figure standing
by her side, and knew that it was Undine.

Fear whispered to Bertalda to leave the veiled figure undisturbed,
anger bade Bertalda order that it should at once depart. And anger was
going to have its way, for Bertalda opened her lips to speak, but
Undine shook her head and held out her hands as though she begged for
mercy.

Then Bertalda remembered all the kindness Undine had shown toward her,
and especially how lovingly she had held out to her the coral
necklace as they were sailing on the Danube, and as she remembered her
hard heart melted, and she wept.

At that moment Father Heilman began to pray, and all the mourners
knelt around the grave, in which the coffin bearing the shield and
helmet of the knight had now been placed.

When the prayer was ended the company arose, but the white-veiled
figure was no longer to be seen.

Only on the spot where she had knelt a stream of crystal water gushed
out of the earth. Quietly it flowed around the grave of the knight and
then onward until it joined the river which ran past the little
village church.

And in days to come the villagers would ofttimes point to the crystal
stream as they told their children in solemn whispers that it, the
little crystal stream, was none other than Undine, poor forsaken
Undine, who thus surrounded and protected Huldbrand, her beloved.

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Undine, by Friedrich de la Motte Fouquée

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNDINE ***

***** This file should be named 18752-8.txt or 18752-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/7/5/18752/

Produced by Jason Isbell, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Undine, by Friedrich de la Motte Fouquée

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Undine

Author: Friedrich de la Motte Fouquée

Editor: Mary Macgregor

Illustrator: Katharine Cameron

Release Date: July 4, 2006 [EBook #18752]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNDINE ***




Produced by Jason Isbell, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                     TOLD TO THE CHILDREN SERIES

                       EDITED BY LOUEY CHISHOLM


       [Illustration: On the threshold stood a little maiden.]




                    Friedrich de la Motte Fouquée


                                UNDINE


                       TOLD TO THE CHILDREN BY

                            MARY MACGREGOR


                           WITH PICTURES BY

                          KATHARINE CAMERON




                     LONDON: T. C. & E. C. JACK

                     NEW YORK: E. P. DUTTON & CO.




       *       *       *       *       *

TO MARGARET

       *       *       *       *       *




ABOUT THIS BOOK

Undine is the name of the water maiden whose story you will read as
you turn the leaves of this little book.

Undine is beautiful as the dawn stealing across the waters, beautiful
as the spray of the crystal waves.

Yet when she comes to earth she comes to seek for that without which
her beauty will be for ever cold, cold and chill as the surge of the
salt, salt sea.

Look deep into her blue eyes and you will see why her beauty is so
cold, so chill.

In the eyes of every mortal you may see a soul. In the gay blue eyes
of Undine, look you long and never so deep, no soul will look forth to
meet your gaze.

Love, joy, sorrow, these are the pearls that shine in the eyes of
every mortal. But in the eyes of the water maiden there is no gleam
of love, no sparkle of joy, no tear of sorrow.

Undine has come to earth to seek for a soul. Without one she may never
know the golden gifts God has given to each mortal, gifts these of
love, joy, sorrow.

You will read in this little book how Undine, the water maiden, won
for herself a human soul.

MARY MACGREGOR.




CONTENTS


Chap.

I.     The Fisherman and the Knight

II.    Undine is Lost

III.   Undine is Found

IV.    The Knight's Story

V.     The Knight stays at the Cottage

VI.    The Wedding

VII.   Undine's Story

VIII.  Huldbrand and Undine leave the Cottage

IX.    The Knight returns to the City

X.     The Birthday Feast

XI.    The Journey to Castle Ringstetten

XII.   Castle Ringstetten

XIII.  The Black Valley

XIV.   Huldbrand forgets his Promise

XV.    Huldbrand and Bertalda

XVI.   Bertalda's Wedding

XVII.  The Burial




LIST OF PICTURES


On the threshold stood a little maiden  _Frontispiece_

Amid the sweet-scented grass, safe from the fury of the storm

'I saw in a great cavern a group of little goblins'

In the little cottage were heard the solemn words of the marriage service

The three travellers soon reached the leafy shades of the forest

At the sound of his voice the girl burst into tears

The little waves seemed to sob as they whispered, 'Alas! alas!'

Slowly, slowly there rose out of the mouth of the well a white figure




CHAPTER I

THE FISHERMAN AND THE KNIGHT


A fisherman brought a stool to the doorway of his home and, sitting
down, he began to mend his nets.

His cottage stood in the midst of green meadows, and his eyes grew
glad as he looked at the green grass. After the heat of the fair
summer's day it was so cool, so refreshing.

At the foot of the meadows lay a large lake of clear blue water. The
fisherman knew it well. It was there his work was done, through
sunshine or through storm.

To-day, as his gaze wandered from the green meadows to the blue lake,
he thought he saw the waters stretch out soft arms, until slowly they
drew the fair meadows, the little cottage into a loving embrace.

The fisherman, his wife and their foster-child lived very quietly on
this pleasant spot. It was but seldom that any one passed their door,
for between the beautiful meadows and the nearest town lay a wood. So
wild and gloomy was the wood, so tangled its pathway, that no one
cared to enter it.

Moreover, it was said that there were strange beings lurking amid the
gloom--ugly goblins, misshapen gnomes; and there were shadowy spirits
too, which flitted through the branches of the strongest trees, and
these even the bravest would not wish to see.

Through this dark and haunted wood the old fisherman had often to
journey.

It was true that he entered the dreaded shades with fear, yet no
spectre ever crossed his path. But perhaps that was because the
thoughts of the old man were pure, or perhaps because he never entered
the forest without singing a hymn in a clear brave voice.

As the fisherman sat mending his nets on this fair summer eve he began
to move restlessly, to glance around uneasily.

Then a sudden terror fell upon him as he heard a noise in the forest
behind.

Ah, how the trees rustled and how the grass was being trampled
underfoot! Could it be a horseman who made haste to escape from some
terrible foe?

And now, although he was wide awake, the fisherman seemed to see a
figure, which he had seen before only in his dreams.

He saw the figure of a tall, strong, snow-white man, who came with
slow steps toward him, and at each step he took, the figure nodded his
great white head.

The fisherman rubbed his eyes as he glanced toward the wood. At the
same moment the wind seemed to blow the leaves aside to make room for
the snow-white man, whose head never ceased to nod.

'Well,' said the fisherman to himself, 'I have ever passed through the
forest unharmed, why should I fear that evil will befall me here?' and
he began to repeat aloud a verse of the Bible.

At the sound of his own voice courage crept back into the heart of the
fisherman, moreover the words of the Holy Book rebuked his fears. Nor
was it long before he was able even to laugh and to see how foolish he
had been.

For listen! The white nodding man was after all only a stream which
the fisherman knew very well, a stream which ran and bubbled out of
the forest and fell into the lake. As for the rustling noise, the
fisherman saw what had caused that, as a gaily clad knight rode forth
from the forest shadows toward the little cottage.

This was no spectre or spirit of the wood, this stranger who wore the
garments of a knight of high degree. He rode a white horse, which
stepped softly, so that the flowers in the meadows lifted their
delicate heads uninjured by his tread.

The fisherman raised his cap as the stranger drew near, and then
quietly went on mending his nets.

Now when the knight saw the old man's face it was welcome to him, as
indeed any human face would have been after the terrors of the forest.
There he had seen strange mocking faces peering at him whichever way
he turned, there he had been followed by strange shadowy forms from
which escape had been wellnigh impossible; here at length was a kind
and friendly mortal. He would ask him for the food and shelter of
which both he and his steed stood in need.

'Dear sir,' answered the fisherman when he had listened to the
knight's request, 'dear sir, if you will deign to enter our lonely
cottage, you will find a welcome with the food and shelter we offer.
As for your horse, can it have a better stable than this tree-shaded
meadow, or more delicious fodder than this green grass?'

Well pleased with this answer, the knight dismounted, and together he
and the fisherman freed the white horse from its saddle and bridle,
and turned it loose into the waving meadow.

Then the old man led the stranger into the cottage.

Here, by the light of the kitchen fire, sat the fisherman's wife. She
rose, with a kind greeting for the unexpected guest. Then seating
herself again in her armchair, she pointed to an old stool with a
broken leg. 'Sit there, good knight,' she said; 'only you must sit
still, lest the broken leg prove too weak to bear you.'

Carrying the stool over beside the old woman, the knight placed it
carefully on the floor and seated himself as he was bidden. As he sat
there talking with the good old fisherman and his wife, it seemed to
him almost as though he were their son, who had come home again after
journeying in a distant land.

It was only when the knight began to speak of the wood that the
fisherman grew restless and refused to listen.

'It were wiser, Sir Knight,' he said, 'not to talk of the wood at
nightfall, or indeed to say much of it at any time.'

And then the old couple told their guest how simply they lived in the
little cottage by the lake, and they in their turn listened eagerly
while the knight told them of himself. He was named Sir Huldbrand, and
he dwelt in his castle of Ringstetten, which stood near the source of
the river Danube.

Now, as he talked or listened to the quiet tales of the old fisherman,
the knight heard a strange sound that seemed to come from the
direction of the window. Again and again it came, a strange sound as
of water being dashed against the window-panes.

It was plain that the fisherman heard it too, for at each splash a
frown crossed his good-natured face.

A louder splash, and a shower of water streamed through the loosely
built window-frame into the kitchen.

Then the old man could sit still no longer. He hastened to the window,
and opening it called out in an angry voice, 'Undine, cease these
childish tricks. A stranger, and he a knight, is in our cottage.'

A low laugh answered him. Hearing it, the old man shut the window and
sat down again, saying to his guest, 'Sir Knight, forgive this rude
behaviour. Undine my foster-daughter is still only a child, although
she is now nearly eighteen years of age. Yet her tricks are harmless,
and she herself is full of kindness.'

'Ah,' said the old woman to her husband, 'to you, who are not with her
save when the day's work is over, her pranks may seem harmless. But
you would not talk so lightly of her ways were she by your side all
day. Ever I must watch her, lest she spoil my baking, or undo my
spinning or burn the soup. Nay--'

'It is true,' said the old man, interrupting his wife with a smile,
'it is true that you have the maiden by your side throughout the
livelong day, while I have but the sea. Yet when the sea is rough and
breaks down my dykes I do not love it the less. Even so do you love
the little one no less for all her tricks and tiresome ways.'

The old woman turned to her guest. 'Indeed, Sir Knight, he speaks
truly. It is not possible to be angry with the maiden long.'

At that moment the door flew open, and she, the maiden of whom they
spoke, entered the little kitchen. She was fairer far than any one the
knight had ever seen.

'Father,' she cried, 'where is he, the stranger guest?'

Even as she spoke her eyes fell on the knight, who had sprung to his
feet as she entered the cottage. He stood gazing in wonder at the
marvellous beauty of the maiden.

But before he could greet her, she was at his side, trustingly looking
up into his face. Then kneeling before him, she seized his hand and
made him seat himself again on the broken old stool.

'You are beautiful, Sir Knight,' she said, 'but how did you come to
this little cottage? Have you looked for us long before you could find
us? Have you had to pass through the terrible forest ere you could
reach us, Sir Knight?'

The knight would have told the maiden the story of his adventures in
the wood, but Undine's foster-mother was already speaking, and her
tones were loud and angry.

'Go, maiden, go get you to work, and trouble not the stranger with
your questions.'

Then Undine, unashamed, drew a little footstool near to Huldbrand, and
sitting down to her spinning, cried, 'I shall work here, close to the
beautiful knight.'

The old fisherman took no notice of the wilful maiden, and began to
speak of other things, hoping that the guest would forget his
foster-daughter's questions.

But even had the knight been able to forget, Undine did not mean to
sit there quietly, her questions unanswered.

Her sweet voice broke upon the silence. 'Our beautiful guest has not
yet told me how he reached our cottage,' she said.

'It is even as you thought,' answered the knight. 'I journeyed through
the haunted wood ere I found this safe and hospitable shelter.'

'Then tell me of your wonderful adventures,' demanded the maiden, 'for
without these no one may pass through the forest.'

Huldbrand shuddered as he remembered the strange beings who had
startled him as he rode through the wood. He glanced distrustfully
toward the window. Were the grim figures there, peering at him through
the window-pane? No, he could see nothing save the dim night light,
which now closed them in.

The knight drew himself up, ashamed of his foolish fears, and turning
toward the maiden, he was beginning to tell her of the wonders which
had befallen him, when the fisherman hurriedly interrupted.

'Nay, now, Sir Knight,' he cried, 'tell not your tale until the hours
of dark have passed.'

At her foster-father's words Undine sprang angrily from the footstool
and stood before him. Her eyes flashed and grew larger, colder.

'You say to the stranger not to tell his tale, father,' she cried,
'you say to him not to answer me. But he shall speak, he shall, he
shall!' And in her anger she stamped her little feet.

The knight wellnigh smiled as he watched the maiden's wrath, but the
old man was grieved that the stranger should see the wayward behaviour
of his foster-child, and he reproved her for her anger. The old woman
also muttered her displeasure.

Then Undine slipped quickly toward the door of the little cottage. She
did not choose to listen to these rebukes.

'I will not stay with you, for you do nothing but scold me, and you
will not do anything that I wish,' she cried, and before they could
reach her she had opened the door, and was away and out, out into the
dark night.




CHAPTER II

UNDINE IS LOST


Huldbrand and the fisherman sprang after the maiden, but when they
reached the door of the cottage and looked out into the night she was
nowhere to be seen, nor could they catch the sound of her tiny feet to
guide them whither she had fled.

The knight looked in astonishment at his host. Was the beautiful
maiden only another of the wonderful beings who had bewildered him in
the forest? Was she some lovely elf or sprite who had come but to vex
them with her pranks?

But as he looked at the old man standing by his side, and saw the
tears streaming from his eyes, he knew it was for no spirit of the
wood that he thus grieved.

'Alas,' sighed the fisherman, 'this is not the first time that the
maiden has treated us thus. It may be she will not return the
livelong night, and until she returns it is not possible that we
should close our eyes. For what terror may not seize upon her as she
wanders hither and thither in the darkness.'

'We must follow her, father, follow her without delay!' cried the
young knight.

'Nay,' answered the fisherman, 'my limbs are stiff. Though I knew
whither she had fled, I could never follow with speed enough to reach
her. Ever she would vanish as I drew near, for she is fleet, fleet as
an arrow from the bow.'

'If we may not follow her, at least let us call and entreat her to
return,' said the young knight, and without waiting for an answer he
called, 'Undine! Undine!'

But the old man shook his head. 'It is useless to call,' he said, 'the
little one will not heed your voice.' Yet still the knight's cry rang
out into the night, 'Undine, dear Undine, I pray you return!'

No answer came back from the darkness, and at length Huldbrand
returned with the fisherman to the cottage.

The old woman, who seemed little troubled by Undine's flight, had gone
to bed and the fire was wellnigh out. But the fisherman, drawing the
ashes together, placed wood on the top of them, and soon the fire
blazed brightly.

Then in the light of the flames they sat and talked, yet they thought
only of Undine. The window rattled. They raised their heads to listen.
The rain fell in heavy drops, pitter, patter. They thought it was the
tread of tiny feet.

'It is she, it is Undine!' they would cry, yet still the maiden did
not come. Then they shook their heads sadly, but as they went on
talking they listened still.

'It was fifteen years ago, on such a night of wind and rain, that she
came,' murmured the old man. 'Our home was sad and desolate, for we
had lost our own little child.'

'Ah,' said the knight, 'tell me how the beautiful maiden came to your
little cottage.'

Now this is the story the fisherman told to the knight.

'It is fifteen years ago,' began the old man, 'since I went through
the forest, hoping to sell my fish in the city beyond. I was alone,
for my wife was at home watching our little babe. Our little babe was
dear to us and very fair.

'In the evening, having sold all my fish, I went home through the
haunted forest, nor did I fear its gloom, for the Lord was at my
right hand.

'But no sooner had I left the wood than I saw my wife running toward
me, while tears streamed from her eyes. She had dressed herself, I
noticed, in black garments, and this she was not used to do. I felt
sure that trouble had befallen us.

'"Where is our child, our little one?" I cried, though even as I spoke
my voice was choked with sobs.

'"Our child is with God, the great Father," answered my wife.

'Then in the midst of her tears the poor mother told her sad tale.

'"I took our child down to the edge of the lake, and there we played
together, so happy, so merry. Suddenly the little one bent forward as
though she saw something beautiful in the water. Then she smiled, and
stretched out her tiny hands, and even as she did so, she slipped from
my arms into the lake, and I saw her no more."

'That evening,' said the fisherman, 'my wife and I sat by our hearth
in silence, we were too sad for words. Suddenly the door of our
cottage flew open, and there before us,[1] on the threshold, stood a
little maiden, three or four years of age. Her eyes were blue and her
hair was gold and she was clothed in beautiful garments.

[Footnote 1: See frontispiece.]

'We gazed in wonder at the tiny vision. Who was she? From whence had
she come? Was she only a magic child come to mock us in our
loneliness, or was she a real, a living child?

'Then as we looked we saw that water trickled from her golden hair and
that little streams were gathering at her tiny feet, as the water
dripped and dripped from her beautiful clothing.

'"She must have fallen into the lake," I said to my wife, "and in some
strange way have wandered into our cottage. We have lost our own dear
child, let us now do all we can to help this little one." Thus it came
to pass that the little stranger slept in the cot in which until now
our own babe had lain.

'When morning dawned my wife fed our tiny guest with bread and milk,
and the little one looked upon us, and her blue eyes danced merrily,
but never a word did she say.

'We asked her where her father and mother dwelt and how she had come
to our cottage. But her only answer was some childish talk of crystal
palaces and shining pearls. Even now indeed she speaks of things so
marvellous that we know not what to think.

'After some days we asked her once again from whence she came. She
told us that she had been on the sea with her mother, and had fallen
from her arms into the water, nor had she known more until she awoke
under the trees, close to our cottage, so well pleased with the fair
shore that she felt no fear.

'Then we said, "Let us keep the little stranger, and care for her as
we would have cared for our own lost child." We sent for a priest, who
baptized her, giving her the name by which she called herself, though
indeed it seemed no name for a Christian child.

'"Undine," said the priest as he performed the holy rite, while she,
the little one, stood before him gentle and sweet. No sooner, however,
was the service ended than she grew wild, wilful as was her way. For
it is true that my wife has had much trouble with the maiden--'

At that moment the knight interrupted the fisherman.

'Listen,' he cried, 'how the stream roars as it dashes past the
window!'

Together they sprang to the door. The moon had risen, and the knight
and the fisherman saw that the stream which ran from the wood had
burst its banks. It was now rushing wildly along, carrying with it
stones and roots of trees. As they looked, the clouds grew dark and
crept across the face of the moon, the wind rose and lashed the water
of the lake into great waves.

'Undine! Undine!' cried the two men together, but no answer reached
them save the shrieking of the wind among the trees of the forest.

Then, careless of the storm, the fisherman and the knight rushed from
the cottage in search of the maiden.




CHAPTER III

UNDINE IS FOUND


As Huldbrand rushed out into the night, followed by the fisherman, the
storm seemed to rage yet more fiercely. The old man was soon left far
behind in the search for the lost maiden.

The knight, battling bravely with the storm, hastened hither and
thither, but all his efforts were vain. Undine was nowhere to be
found.

And now, as the rain dashed down upon him and the wind hustled him,
Huldbrand grew bewildered. The storm seemed to have changed the
peaceful meadows into a weary wilderness, and even the maiden herself
seemed to flit before him as a phantom spirit of the wind.

Could it all have been but a dream? Had the cottage, the fisherman and
his wife been as unreal as the figures that had followed him in the
haunted forest? No, that he would not believe, for even yet in the
distance he could hear the faint echo of the fisherman's voice as he
called out pitifully, 'Undine! Undine!' Now in his search the knight
had reached the edge of the stream. The stream, as you know, had
already overflowed its bank, and as the moon suddenly shone through
the dark clouds, Huldbrand saw that the water was rushing back toward
the forest. In this way the little bit of meadow-land on which the
fisherman's cottage stood was turned into an island.

A terrible thought struck the knight. Had Undine strayed into the
fearful forest she could not now return to the cottage, save across
the raging stream, nay, she might even now be surrounded by the
spirits of the wood. She would be among them alone, helpless.

At once Huldbrand made up his mind to cross the torrent. He plunged
into the water, and even as he did so he seemed to see on the other
shore the figure of a tall white man, who nodded his head and mocked
him as he struggled on. Huldbrand knew the tall white figure only too
well. It was the one that had followed him as he journeyed through the
forest.

Now; in his haste to find Undine, the knight was leaping from stone to
stone, sometimes slipping into the water, then with a struggle
placing his feet once again upon the stones. These, tossed by the
rushing stream, gave no firm foothold to the knight, and he was forced
to seize the branch of a fir-tree to help him across the dangerous
passage.

While he was still in the midst of the current, he heard a sweet voice
crying, 'Trust not the stream, trust it not, for it is full of craft!'

The knight knew the voice. It was that of the maiden for whom he
sought. Yet though he peered eagerly through the gloom he could see no
trace of her.

'See! you can find me now, Sir Knight, for the moon is shining clear,'
cried the voice he longed to hear, and looking around him Huldbrand
saw where Undine had found a shelter. It was on a little island,
beneath the branches of a great tree, that the maiden sat. There was
no terror of the storm in her eyes. She was even smiling happily as
she nestled amid the sweet scented grass, safe from the fury of the
storm.

A few quick strides and the knight had crossed the stream and stood by
the side of the maiden. She bade him sit down on the grass, and then,
whispering low, she said, 'You shall tell me your story here, Sir
Knight, on this quiet island here, where no cross old people will
disturb us, and where we are sheltered from the storm that rages
beyond.'

[Illustration: Amid the sweet-scented grass, safe from the fury of the
storm]

Then Huldbrand forgot all about the old man who was still seeking for
his child, forgot too all about the old woman who was alone in the
little cottage by the lake, and he sat down to tell his tale as the
maiden wished.

Meanwhile the fisherman had reached the brink of the stream, and great
was his surprise to see the knight seated by the side of his lost
child.

'You have found her, you have found my little one!' he cried
reproachfully. 'Why did you not hasten to tell me she was found, Sir
Knight?'

Then Huldbrand was ashamed, though, as he told the old man, it was but
a little while since his search had ceased.

'Bring her without more delay to the mainland!' shouted the fisherman,
when he had listened to the sorry excuse which was all the knight
could offer.

But Undine had no wish to go home. She would rather stay with the
knight in the forest than go back to the cottage, for there, so she
said, no one would do as she wished.

Then, flinging her arms around the knight, she clung to him and
begged him to stay with her in the forest.

The old fisherman wept as he heard her words, yet Undine did not seem
to notice his tears. But the knight could not help seeing the old
man's grief, and he was troubled.

'Undine,' he cried, 'the tears of your foster-father have touched my
heart. We will return to him.'

The blue eyes of the maiden opened wide with surprise, yet she
answered gently, 'Sir Knight, if this is indeed your will, we shall
return to the mainland. There you must make the old man promise to
listen in silence to all that you saw as you journeyed through the
forest.'

'Only come, and you shall do all that you wish!' cried the fisherman,
and he stretched out his arms and nodded his head, to show to the
maiden how glad he was that she should do as she wished. But the
knight shuddered as his eyes fell upon the fisherman. The nodding
head, the white hair reminded him once again of the tall white man of
the forest.

Shaking off his fears he lifted Undine in his arms and bore her across
the stream. Already the storm was wellnigh over and the waters flowed
more quietly. It now seemed to the knight only a few steps from the
grassy plot where he had found the maiden to the green meadows among
which the cottage stood.

'Now will I hear the brave knight's story,' cried the maiden, and the
old people smiled and said they too would hear the tale.

And the sun rose slowly over the lake and the birds sang merrily on
the wet and leafy trees, as the knight began his tale.




CHAPTER IV

THE KNIGHT'S STORY


'It must be about eight days ago now,' said the knight, 'since I left
my castle of Ringstetten, and journeyed toward the city which lies
beyond the haunted forest.

'The city was gay with lords and ladies who had come thither for the
tournament which was then being held.

'I at once entered the lists, for my steed was strong and I myself was
eager for the fray. Once, as I rested from the combat, my eyes fell
upon a lady who was wondrous fair. She was looking down from a gallery
upon the tournament.

'Bertalda was the name of the beautiful maiden, and she was the
foster-child of a great duke. I knew that, as I again seized my lance,
the lady's eyes followed me into the lists, and I fought even more
bravely than before.

'In the evening a great festival was held, and here I met Bertalda,
and danced with her; indeed, evening after evening we were together
until the tournament drew to a close.'

As Huldbrand spoke these words he felt a sharp pain in his left hand.
It was hanging by his side, and as he looked down to see what had
caused the pain, he found that Undine had fastened in it her little
pearly teeth.

The knight could see that the maiden's face was no longer smiling. She
looked up at him, and there was sorrow in her large blue eyes as she
whispered, 'Sir Knight, it is your own fault that I hurt you. I would
not have you praise the lady Bertalda.' Then quickly, as though
ashamed of her words, she hid her face in her hands.

As the knight went on with his story, his face was grave.

'It is true,' he said, 'that Bertalda was a lovely maiden, yet as I
knew her better I found her ways were cold and proud. She pleased me
less as the days passed by, though, as she looked upon me with favour,
I begged that as a token of it she would give me a glove.

"You shall have it," answered she, "if you will go alone through the
forest which men say is haunted, and bring me tidings of all that
happens to you."

'I cared little for her glove, but I would not tarry to be asked a
second time to go through the forest, lest the maiden should doubt my
courage.'

'I thought Bertalda had loved you,' cried Undine, 'yet then had she
not driven you from her into the haunted forest.'

The knight smiled at the maiden's words and went on with his tale.

'It was but yesterday morning that I set forth on my adventure. The
sun shone bright, so bright that it was not easy to believe that evil
was lurking in the shadows beneath the rustling leaves. "I shall soon
return," I said to myself, as I plunged into the green shade.

'But amid the maze of trees it was not long ere I lost sight of the
path by which I had entered the wood.

'"It may be that I shall lose myself in this mighty forest," I
thought, "but no other danger threatens me."

'I gazed up toward the sun, which had risen higher now than when first
I entered the wood, and as I gazed I saw a black thing among the
branches of a leafy oak.

'Was it a bear, I wondered, and my hand felt for the sword that hung
by my side.

'But it was no bear, for ere long I heard a voice mocking me with
rough and cruel words. "Aha, Sir Wiseacre," said the voice, "I am
breaking twigs off these tall trees, so that at midnight I may light a
fire in which to roast you." Then, before I could answer, the black
thing grinned at me and rustled the branches, until my steed grew
restless and at length galloped away.'

Undine looked at the knight, her blue eyes sparkling as she cried,
'But indeed the wicked creature did not dare to roast you, Sir
Knight!'

'In its terror,' continued Huldbrand, 'my horse dashed itself against
the trees, reared and again rushed madly forward. Onward we flew,
until at length I saw before me a dark abyss. Yet still I found it
impossible to pull up my frightened steed.

'Then all at once a tall white man stood still directly in front of my
maddened horse, which swerved aside as soon as it saw the tall man,
and in that moment I was once more master of my steed. I saw also that
my deliverer was not a tall white man, as I had imagined, but a brook,
which shone silver in the sunlight.'

'Dear brook, I will be grateful to you for evermore,' cried Undine,
clapping her hands as she spoke, in childish glee. But the fisherman
shook his head and was silent.

'And now,' said the knight, 'I was anxious to hasten as quickly as
possible through the forest, for it seemed to me that not only might I
find it difficult to regain the pathway I had lost, but that strange
beings might again startle both me and my noble steed.

'I turned my horse away from the dark chasm which lay before us, but
even as I did so I found at my side a strange little man. He was
uglier than any one I had ever seen. His nose was wellnigh as large as
all the rest of his body, and his mouth was so big that it stretched
from one ear to the other.

'This ugly creature, as soon as he saw that I had noticed him, grinned
at me, until his mouth looked even larger than before. He scraped his
feet along the ground and bowed mockingly to me a thousand times.

'My horse was trembling at the sight of the strange figure, so I
resolved to ride on in search of further adventure, or if I found
none, to ride back to the city which I had left in the morning.

'But the ugly little man did not mean to let me escape. Quick as
lightning he sprang round and stood again in front of my horse.

'"Get out of the way," I now cried in anger, "lest my steed tramples
you under its feet."

'This did not seem to frighten the strange creature. He laughed in my
face, and then said in a gruff voice, "You must give me gold, for it
was I who turned your horse aside from yonder dark abyss."

'"Nay, what you say is not true," I answered him, "for it was the
silver brook that saved me and my horse from being dashed to pieces.
Nevertheless, take thy gold and begone."

'As I spoke I flung a coin into the strange-shaped cap which he was
holding before me, then putting spurs to my horse I rode quickly
forward.

'I heard the ugly little man give a loud scream, then to my surprise
there he was, running by my side, grinning and making horrible
grimaces.

'My horse was galloping, and I thought I would soon get away from the
little man. But it seemed impossible to go faster than he, for he took
a spring, a jump, and there he was still by my side. He held up the
piece of gold I had thrown to him, and in a hollow voice he cried, "It
is a false coin, a false coin!"

'At length I could bear his horrible shrieks no longer. I pulled up my
steed, and holding out two coins I called to him, "Take the gold, but
follow me no farther!"

'Then the little ugly man began to scrape his feet and bow his head,
but it was plain that he was not yet satisfied.

'"I do not wish your gold," he grumbled. "I have gold enough and to
spare, as you shall soon see."

'As he spoke a strange thing happened. The beautiful green ground
seemed to change into clear green glass. I looked through the glass
and saw in a great cavern a group of little goblins.

'They were playing at ball, these little goblins, and I noticed that
all their toys were made of silver or gold. Merry little creatures
they were, running swiftly hither and thither after the ball, nor was
it easy to see whether they were standing on their heads or on their
heels, or whether they were running on their hands or on their feet.
No sooner was their game ended than they pelted each other with their
playthings, then in a mad frolic lifted handfuls of gold dust and
flung it each in the other's eyes.

'All this time the ugly little man was standing half on the ground and
half within the great cavern where the tiny goblins played their
games. Now I heard him call to the mischievous imps to give him
handfuls of gold.

[Illustration: 'I saw in a great cavern a group of little goblins']

'This they did, and then he, laughing in my face, showed the gold to
me ere he flung it back again into the cavern.

'Then the ugly little man called to the tiny goblins to stop their
pranks and look at the coins I had given to him. When they caught
sight of them they held their little sides, shaking with laughter;
then all at once they turned and hissed at me.

'In spite of myself terror crept over me. Again I plunged my spurs
into my horse's sides, and it dashed madly off into the midst of the
forest.

'When at length the flight ended, the evening lay cool and quiet
around me. A white footpath seemed to point out the way which led back
to the city. But each time I tried to approach it a face peered at me
from between the trees. I turned to escape from this new phantom, but
in vain, for whichever way I turned there was the face still staring
at me.

'I grew angry and urged my horse in the direction of the shadowy face,
only however to find myself drenched by a stream of white foam.

'Thus I was driven away from the white footpath, and only one way,
rough and tangled, was left open to me. As soon as I began to follow
it, the face, though it kept close behind, did me no further harm.

'Yet again and again I turned, hoping to find that the face had
disappeared. Instead I found it closer than before, and now I could
see that it belonged to a tall white man. It was true that at times
the long white figure seemed to be but a wandering stream, but of this
I was never sure.

I was weary now and my horse was exhausted. It seemed useless to try
any longer to force my way past the white face, so I went on riding
quietly along the one path left open to me. The head of the tall man
then began to nod, as though to say that at length I was doing as he
wished.

'By this path I reached the end of the wood, and as the meadows and
the lake came into sight the white man vanished, and I found myself
standing near to your little cottage.'

As the knight had now finished the story of his adventure, the
fisherman began to talk to his guest of how he might return in safety
to the city and to the followers who there awaited him.

Huldbrand, listening to the old man, yet caught the soft ripple of
Undine's laughter.

'Why do you laugh, Undine?' asked the knight. 'Are you so pleased to
hear your foster-father talk of my return to the city?'

'I laugh for joy that you cannot leave us,' said the maiden. 'You have
but to look to see that you must stay.'

Huldbrand and the fisherman rose and saw that what the maiden had said
was indeed true. It would not be possible for the knight to leave the
little island until the stream had once more returned to its usual
course.

As they entered the cottage, Huldbrand whispered to the maiden,
'Undine, tell me that you are glad that I cannot yet return to the
crowded city.'

But the maiden's face was no longer glad, nor would she answer the
knight's question. She had remembered Bertalda.

When the stream had grown quiet the knight would go back to the lady
for whose sake he had undergone such strange perils. And of that time
the wilful maiden did not wish to think.




CHAPTER V

THE KNIGHT STAYS AT THE COTTAGE


Day after day the forest stream rushed wildly on. The bed along which
it thus hastened grew wider and wider, separating the island with the
fisherman's cottage yet farther from the mainland.

The knight was well pleased to linger where he was. Never had he found
the days pass by so swiftly.

He discovered an old crossbow in a corner of the cottage. When he had
mended it he would wander forth in search of birds, and if he
succeeded in bringing some down with his arrows, he would carry them
back to fill the larder of the little cottage.

And Undine, for she was pitiful, would not fail to upbraid the knight
for taking the life of the little birds, so glad, so free. Seeing them
lying there, quiet and still, she would weep.

Yet, did Huldbrand return without his prey, so wilful was the maiden
that she would blame him, and complain that she could now have nought
to eat save fish or crabs.

But the knight loved Undine's wayward words. And well he knew that
after she had shown her anger most, she would in but a little while be
again kind and gentle as before.

On the quiet island Huldbrand heard no call to knightly deeds. His
sword hung unused on the cottage wall, his steed fed undisturbed among
the sweet-scented meadows.

'The maiden is the daughter of a great prince, thought the knight. 'It
is not possible that she should remain in this humble cottage all her
life. She shall be my bride, and in days to come she shall dwell in my
castle of Ringstetten on the banks of the Danube.'

Meanwhile, naught disturbed the dwellers in the little cottage, save
now and again when her foster-mother would chide Undine in the
presence of the knight.

Now, though this displeased Huldbrand, he could not blame the old
woman, for it was ever true that the maiden deserved reproof more
often than she received it.

At length wine and food began to grow scarce in the little cottage.
In the evening, when the wind howled around their home, the fisherman
and the knight had been used to cheer themselves with a flask of wine.
But now that the fisherman was not able to reach the city, his supply
of wine had come to an end. Without it the old man and the knight grew
silent and dull.

Undine teased them, laughed at them, but they did not join in her
merriment.

Then one evening the maiden left the cottage, to escape, so she said,
from the gloomy faces in the little kitchen. It was a stormy night,
and as it grew dark the wind began to blow, the waters to rise.
Huldbrand and the fisherman thought of the terrible night on which
they had sought so long in vain for the wilful maiden. They even began
to fear that they had lost her again, and together they rushed to the
door. But to their great delight Undine was standing there, laughing
and clapping her little hands.

'Come with me,' she cried when she saw them, 'come with me and I will
show you a cask which the stream has thrown ashore. If it is not a
wine cask you may punish me as you will.'

The men went with her, and there in a little creek they found the
cask and began to roll it toward the cottage.

But though they rolled it rapidly the storm crept quickly up. So black
were the clouds, so threatening, that it seemed each moment that the
rain would burst forth upon them.

Undine helped the men to roll the cask, and as the sky grew yet more
threatening she looked up at the dark clouds and said in a warning
voice, 'Beware, beware that you wet us not.'

'It is wrong of you thus to try to rebuke the storm,' said her
foster-father, but at his words the maiden only laughed low to herself
in the darkness.

It would seem, however, that Undine's warning had been of use, for it
was not until the cask was rolled in at the cottage door that the
storm broke.

By the bright glow of the fire they opened the cask and found that it
did indeed hold wine. They tasted it and found it very good, and soon
they were once more as gay as the maiden could wish.

Then suddenly the fisherman grew grave, grieving for him who had lost
the cask.

'Nay, grieve not,' said the knight, 'I will seek for the owner and
repay him for his loss when I come again to my castle at
Ringstetten.'

The fisherman smiled and was content.

Undine, however, was angry with the knight. 'It is foolish,' said she,
'to talk of seeking for the owner of the cask. Were you lost in the
search I should weep. Would you not rather stay by my side?'

'Yes, and that do you right well know,' answered the knight.

'Then,' said the maiden, 'why should you speak of helping other
people. It is but foolish talk.'

The foster-mother sighed as she listened to Undine's careless words,
while the fisherman forgot his usual quiet and scolded her sharply.

'Your words are wild, and are such as no Christian maiden should
utter,' he said. 'May God forgive both you and those who have allowed
you thus to speak.'

'It is indeed true,' said Undine, 'that as I think I speak. Why,
therefore, should you scold me for my words.'

'Say no more,' said the fisherman, for he was very angry.

Then the maiden, who, for all her wilfulness, was timid as a bird,
drew close to the knight and whispered, 'Are you also angry with me,
Sir Knight.'

Huldbrand could find no words with which to comfort the maiden, whom
he had learned to love. He could only hold her hand and stroke her
golden hair, but with this Undine was well content.




CHAPTER VI

THE WEDDING


Now it was on this same night on which the cask was found that, as the
storm still raged, a knock was heard at the cottage door. It startled
all within, for who was there could have crossed the stream that now
separated them from the mainland? It could surely be no mortal who
stood without.

As the inhabitants of the little cottage sat silent, thinking these
thoughts, the knock was heard again. It was followed by a low groan.
Then the knight rose and took his sword from the wall where it had
hung for many days. But the fisherman, watching him, shook his head as
he muttered, 'A sword will be of but little use to-night.'

Undine meanwhile had gone toward the door. She did not open it, but
she called out in a loud voice, 'Remember, whoever you be, spirit of
earth or fire, that if harm befall us my uncle Kühleborn will punish
you.'

These strange words made the knight marvel. But a voice answered the
maiden, 'I am no wandering spirit, but an old frail man. For the love
of God open your door and give me shelter from the storm.'

At these words Undine, holding a lamp high in one hand, flung the door
wide open with the other. Before her stood an old priest, who looked
upon her with surprise. How came so fair a maiden to be dwelling in so
lonely a home? he wondered, and in his bewilderment he stood still
outside the shelter and warmth which awaited him.

'Will you not enter, holy Father?' said Undine.

The priest roused himself to thank the beautiful maiden, and then
entered the kitchen. Water flowed from his long robe and trickled from
his long white beard and snowy locks.

'Come with me, Father,' said the fisherman, and he drew the priest
into a little room and made him take off all his wet garments. Then,
clad in a suit of dry clothes which belonged to his host, the priest
returned to the kitchen.

The old woman pulled forward her own armchair and made the priest sit
in it, while Undine brought a little stool and put it beneath the feet
of the stranger.

Meanwhile food was placed before the priest. When he had eaten he was
refreshed and able to tell his host how he had reached the island.

'It was but yesterday,' he said, 'that I was sailing across the lake,
when a sudden storm arose. A wave dashed upon my boat, overturning it
and throwing me on to the shore. I lay there stunned for some time.
Then, as I slowly recovered my senses, I saw a footpath before me, and
following it I reached the shelter of your cottage.'

Then the fisherman said to the priest, 'Unless the stream subsides we
shall, I fear, be in need of food. For days I have found it wellnigh
impossible to fish in the lake, and even should I be able to do so I
could not sell my fish. It would be too hard a task to reach the city
beyond the wood until the stream once more runs quietly between its
banks.'

To Huldbrand as he listened it mattered not though the stream rushed
on for ever. The world beyond the wood was becoming to the knight more
and more as a dream. Also the little island on which he was living
seemed to him the most beautiful spot on earth, for on it dwelt the
maiden he loved so well.

As these thoughts passed through the knight's mind he turned, and saw
at once that Undine must have annoyed her foster-mother, for the old
woman was casting angry looks upon the maiden. Perhaps the angry looks
would be followed by harsh words, as had happened on other days.

Quickly the knight made up his mind. Were Undine but his wife, no one
would venture to reprove her. The priest was in the cottage. Why
should he not marry the beautiful maiden without delay?

He spoke a few words to Undine, then drawing her gently toward the
priest he said, 'Father, you see before you the maiden whom I love,
whom, if her foster-parents are willing, I would wed this very day.'

The priest turned to the fisherman and his wife. 'You hear the words
of the noble knight,' he said. 'Are you willing that he should wed the
maiden?'

It was easy to see that the old people were in no way startled by the
priest's words.

'To no braver or more courteous knight could we give our
foster-child,' said the fisherman, and his wife smiled and nodded as
he spoke.

Then the foster-mother brought two candles, which long years before
had been blessed by a holy man, and placed them on the kitchen table,
while the knight, unfastening the chain which hung around his neck,
began to take off it two golden rings, one for Undine, the other for
himself.

'Ah, do not so,' cried the maiden. 'Touch not the golden chain.
Believe me, my parents, could they know, would wish us to use the
rings they entrusted to my care when I was but a child.'

She ran quickly from the room, and when she came back she held in her
hand two radiant rings, one of which she gave to the knight, while the
other she kept for herself.

Her foster-parents looked at Undine in surprise, for they had neither
seen the rings nor known that their foster-child had any jewels in her
possession.

Then the maiden, seeing their astonishment, told how her parents had
stitched the rings into the little garments she had worn when first
she came to them, a tiny child. 'They bid me also tell no one that
they had given me these precious gems until the evening of my
wedding-day.'

Meanwhile the priest had clad himself again in his own garments, and
lighting the candles, he called to Huldbrand and the maiden to come
and kneel before him.

[Illustration: In the little cottage were heard the solemn words of
the marriage service]

Gladly they obeyed, and then in the little cottage were heard the
solemn words of the marriage service, and Undine became the wife of
Huldbrand, the knight of Ringstetten.

The maiden had been unusually quiet as she listened to the solemn
words of the marriage service, but now a spirit of mischief seemed to
seize her. She laughed and danced, she played childish tricks upon her
husband, her foster-parents, even upon the priest himself.

Her foster-mother would have rebuked Undine as of old, but the knight
silenced her, for Undine was now his wife. Yet he himself was little
pleased with her behaviour. When Undine saw a frown upon his brow, it
is true that she would grow quieter, and sitting near him, would for a
little while smooth his brow with her soft white hand. Soon, however,
a new fancy would take hold of her, she would jump up, and her tricks
would grow even more vexing than before.

Then the priest spoke, and his voice was grave.

'Lady, you are fair to look on, but I pray you to cease these foolish
ways, lest your soul become less beautiful than your face.'

Undine's laughter ceased. After a while she looked at the priest and
asked in a timid whisper, 'What is this thing which you call a soul,
holy Father?'

Over the little kitchen a hush fell as the holy man answered, 'How can
I tell you what this strange thing which we call our soul really is?
Yet can I tell you why God gives us this great gift. It is that we may
learn to know and love Him. Our bodies will grow old, and we will lay
them aside as a garment which we no longer need, while our souls will
live and dwell with Him for ever.'

Undine's eyes grew sad, tears streamed down her cheek. 'Ah,' she
sobbed, 'I have no soul, no soul. I think it would hurt me to have a
soul, yet fain would I have one.'

Then, with one of those quick changes which had at times startled her
foster-parents, she dried her tears, and ran quickly to the window.
She looked out into the night. It seemed to call her forth to a
careless, thoughtless life. Why should she stay when the wind
whispered to her and the waters brought her messages from the depths
of the sea?

'Ah no, I will have no soul!' cried Undine, turning once more toward
the priest. 'I must be free, free as the breezes and the dancing
waters.'

'Your love for me will change and grow cold,' said the knight sadly,
'unless you have a human soul. For none can love truly without this
precious gift.'

Yet even as he spoke Huldbrand was trying to stifle a fear that had
begun to creep into his heart, a fear that the maiden he had wedded
was a fairy or a mocking spirit from another world.

But his beautiful wife was smiling softly, for as he had spoken his
last words she had learned a secret. And as the knight looked into her
blue love-lit eyes he too learned the secret. Through love Undine had
won a soul, which is indeed the gift of God to every mortal.




CHAPTER VII

UNDINE'S STORY


Undine lost her wilful ways on her wedding-day.

Her foster-parents watched her, bewildered, so gentle was she, so
thoughtful. She, who had but seldom flung her arms around them,
embraced them now, and thanked them with tears in her eyes for all
their care. Nor would she let them go, until she saw that the old
woman wished to prepare breakfast.

Then she herself flew to the hearth, and making her foster-mother
rest, she swept and dusted, and prepared the meal. It was strange that
she had never thought of doing this before.

And those who dwelt with her, as they watched her grow so gracious, so
gentle, learned to love her even more than in the days when she had
been wild and wilful.

One evening Undine, with Huldbrand by her side, wandered along the
bank of the forest stream.

The knight marvelled that the waters had suddenly grown peaceful, and
that now again they were gliding quietly along their usual course.

'To-morrow,' said his fair wife sorrowfully, 'to-morrow you can ride
forth where you will.'

'But,' said Huldbrand, 'you know well that if I go I will not leave
you behind.'

'I do not think you will leave me, Huldbrand. Yet carry me across to
yonder little island, for there I will tell to you the story of the
maiden you have made your wife. It may be that when you have heard it,
you will ride away alone into the wide world.'

Then silently the knight carried her, as she wished, across the stream
to the tiny island, and laid her down on the green grass. It was on
this very spot that he had found her on the night of the terrible
storm.

'Sit there, where I can look into your eyes as I tell my tale,' said
his wife, 'for as I look I shall be able to see what you are thinking,
nor will there be any need for you to tell me.'

'In the world,' said Undine, 'there are many beings whom mortals
seldom see, for should these beings hear a mortal drawing near, they
quickly hide themselves. These beings of whom I tell you are spirits
that dwell in fire, earth, air and water.

'Those who dwell in the flames are called salamanders, nor do these
spirits wish for any other home, as they play merrily and fearlessly
among the sparkling fires.

'Deep under the earth live the gnomes, rough and fearsome spirits
they, full of malice too, should any mortal cross their path.

'In lofty forests dwell more fair and joyous spirits, guarding each
some well-loved spot from a mortal's heavy tread.

'And better known and better loved than these of whom I have told you
are the spirits who haunt the waters. These have their home in sea or
lake, in river or in little brook.

'Deep down under the blue waters, hidden from mortal eyes, are the
palaces of the water spirits. Their walls are built of crystal and are
hung with coral, their floors are paved with shining pearls.

'Deep down under the blue waters are yellow sands. There the merry
little water-spirits play their games and gambol all the glad long
days, until they leave their childhood far behind.

'Pure and fair, more fair even than the race of mortals are the
spirits of the water. Fishermen have chanced to see these water-nymphs
or mermaidens, and they have spoken of their wondrous beauty. Mortals
too have named these strange women Undines. Look upon me, Huldbrand,
look long and well, for I, your wife, am an Undine!'

The knight gazed sadly upon his beautiful wife. He wished to believe
that she was but weaving fairy tales with which to charm him through
the quiet eventide, yet as he gazed upon her he shuddered lest the
tale she told was true.

Undine saw that he shuddered, and tears sprang into her blue eyes as
she went on with her story.

'When I was a child I lived in the depths of the sea. My father's
crystal palace was my home, for he, my father, is the Lord of the
Ocean. Kühleborn is my uncle. He used to watch me with his big eyes
until I grew afraid, and even now, although I live above the waters,
he comes to me and ofttimes he frightens me as though I were again a
little child.

'Brothers and cousins, too, were mine and played with me on the yellow
sands beneath the blue sea.

'Merry were our lives and free, for the sorrows of mortals came not
near to us. We had no soul, the gift God gives to every mortal, and
without a soul no pain could enter into our lives.

'Yet my father, the King of the Ocean, longed that I, his only
daughter, should gain the great gift which is given to every mortal.
And this he wished, though well he knew that to mortals was given,
with the gift of a soul, the power to suffer.

'An Undine can gain a soul in one way alone. She must love and be
loved by one of mortal birth.

'You, Huldbrand, you have given me my soul, and should you now despise
me or drive me from you, I should suffer even as one of your own race.

'Yet if you care not to have an Undine for your wife, leave me, and I
will plunge into the waters. Then Kühleborn, my uncle, who brought me
a merry happy child to the fisherman, will come and carry me back to
my ocean home. There will I live, loving, sorrowing, for into the
depths of the blue sea will I carry my new-won soul.'

Then Huldbrand forgot everything save the great love he bore his fair
wife Undine. He took her in his arms and carried her across the
little stream, whispering to her that she should never leave him.

Together they went back to the cottage, and to the water-maiden the
little dwelling gleamed more bright than the crystal palace of the
Ocean King.




CHAPTER VIII

HULDBRAND AND UNDINE LEAVE THE COTTAGE


The following day Undine was up and out early in the morning, to see
if the forest stream was still flowing quietly within its banks. Now
the forest stream was the one haunted by her uncle Kühleborn, and
often he would use the waters for his own purposes. Sometimes
Kühleborn's purposes were kind, sometimes they were unkind.

Undine was, in the cottage again, preparing the morning meal, when
Huldbrand entered the kitchen. She greeted him brightly.

'My uncle Kühleborn has made the waters calm,' she cried. 'The stream
is gliding peaceful as of old through the forest. Neither in air nor
water are there spirits to molest us. Should you wish it, you can
journey homeward to-day.'

Huldbrand did not like to hear Undine speak of her strange kinsfolk,
yet so gentle was she, so full of grace, that he soon forgot his
vexation.

Together the knight and his wife went to the door of the cottage, and
looked out at the meadows and the lake lying in the morning sunshine.

'Why should we leave this quiet spot to-day?' said Huldbrand, for well
he loved the island where he had found his beautiful bride. 'In the
great world we will spend no gladder days than in this simple
meadow-land. Let us, then, yet linger here for a few days.'

'It shall be as you wish,' answered Undine. 'Yet will my
foster-parents grieve the more when I leave them, should they learn
that I have now a soul. To-day they only marvel that I am kind and
thoughtful, thinking that to-morrow I will once again be wild and
careless as of old. But should I dwell here much longer they will know
that never in the days to come will I be thoughtless as in former
days. For I cannot hide my new gift. They will hear it in my voice,
they will feel it in my touch, they will see it in my eyes. And having
known that now, at length, I could love them well, they would grieve
to lose me.'

'We will leave to-day, this very hour,' said the knight, so pleased
was he with Undine's new care for her kind old foster-parents.

The priest who had found shelter in the cottage was also ready to
return to his monastery. He would journey with the knight and his lady
until they were safe from the perils of the haunted wood.

Accordingly they sought the fisherman and his wife, and told them that
now they must leave the shelter of their cottage and journey toward
the city that lay beyond the forest.

The farewells were said and Huldbrand lifted his beautiful wife and
seated her on his horse. He himself would walk by her side.

The three travellers soon reached the leafy shades of the forest.

On one side of the lady walked the priest, clad in a long white robe,
while, guarding her on the other side, was, as I told you, the knight.
His armour was burnished and his sword was once more girt by his side.

As Huldbrand and Undine talked joyfully together, a stranger joined
the priest, yet they in their joy did not notice this.

The stranger wore a garment such as a monk might wear. The hood was
drawn forward and wellnigh hid his face, while the whole robe hung
loosely around him, in great folds, so that at each step he must
gather it up and throw it over his arm.

[Illustration: The three travellers soon reached the leafy shades of
the forest]

'I have lived in the forest for many years,' said the stranger to the
priest, 'and I love it for its great beauty. As I flit in and out
among the dark shadows of the trees, I play with the stray sunbeams as
they cast their glances here and there on my white robe.'

'Tell me your name, for I would fain know who you are,' said the
priest to his companion.

'Nay, tell me first who are you who ask?' said the stranger.

'Father Heilman is my name,' answered the priest, 'and I am journeying
back to my monastery, after an absence of many days.'

'Now I,' said the stranger, 'am named Lord Kühleborn, though sometimes
I am called Kühleborn the Free, for indeed I am free as the wild birds
of the air to go hither and thither as I will. Meanwhile, Sir Priest,
I bid you farewell, for I would speak to yonder lady.'

Even as he spoke, Kühleborn left the priest and came close up to
Undine. He bent forward as though he would whisper in her ear. But
Undine drew herself quickly away, crying as she saw who was by her
side, 'I no longer wish to have aught to do with you!'

But her uncle only laughed at her words.

'You are my niece,' he said, 'and I am here to guide you through the
forest. The goblins in the cavern beneath the earth might come forth
to do you harm were I not here to keep them quiet. The priest, who is
named Father Heilman, speaks to me more kindly than do you. Know you
not that it was I who brought him in safety to the little island to be
ready for your wedding-day?'

Undine and the knight turned to the priest, but he was walking as one
in deep thought, and had, it was easy to see, heard nothing that the
stranger had said.

Then Undine turned again to her uncle. 'See yonder,' she cried, 'I can
see already the end of the wood. We need your help no longer. I pray
you vanish and do not disturb us further.'

When Kühleborn saw that Undine really wished him to leave her, he was
angry. He made faces and shook his fist at his niece, until at length
she screamed, 'Huldbrand, Huldbrand, save me, I entreat you!'

The knight at once drew his sword and would have struck at the rude
stranger. But as he thrust in the direction of Kühleborn he felt a
waterfall come rushing down from a rock above him. He drew his wife
back, that she might not be drenched, but as he did so a white spray
was flung after them which wet them both to the skin. At that moment
they heard, as they thought, a low mocking laugh.

'It is strange,' said the priest, 'that the ripple of the stream
should sound almost as the voice of a man.'

To Huldbrand the stream still seemed to be speaking, and these were
the words he thought he heard. 'You were foolish, Sir Knight, to draw
your sword, yet will I not be angry with you, nor will I quarrel with
you so long as you guard well your beautiful wife. Yet be not again
thus hasty, Sir Knight.'

As the voice faded away into silence the travellers reached the end of
the wood. Before them was the city, glowing red in the rays of the
setting sun.




CHAPTER IX

THE KNIGHT RETURNS TO THE CITY


Now all this time the lady Bertalda had been very unhappy because of
the knight's long absence. Indeed, she had no sooner sent Huldbrand
forth into the haunted forest than she began to wish that she had kept
him by her side. As day after day passed and he did not return, she
grew fearful lest he had lost his way and perished in the mazes of the
wood. When a little later she heard of the floods that had made the
country around impassable, she wellnigh lost all hope of his return.

In spite of this, however, she begged the knights who had taken part
in the tournament to go in search of Huldbrand, but this they were
unwilling to do.

As for the knight's own servants, they would not leave the city
without their master, yet neither would they follow him into the
dreaded forest. They lingered on at an inn of the city, lamenting his
absence, but doing nought to bring him back.

It was now, when there seemed but little hope of his return, that
Huldbrand, to the surprise of every one, appeared in the city,
bringing with him a wife of wondrous beauty, as well as Father
Heilman, the priest who had married them.

Huldbrand's servants rejoiced to see their young master alive and
well. And the town folk, who had heard of his disappearance, were glad
that the light-hearted knight, who had always treated them with
courtesy, had suffered no harm in his adventure.

But the lady Bertalda, though she was glad that the knight had
returned, was sad when she saw that he had not come back alone. She
herself had loved him, and had hoped that, if ever he should return,
he would claim her as his bride.

Yet though Bertalda was sad, she was a wise maiden, and she received
Undine kindly, thinking that she was a princess whom Huldbrand had
rescued from a wicked wizard. For the true story of the beautiful
Undine was known to none, save to the knight alone.

As for Undine, she no sooner saw Bertalda than she loved her, and
begged her to stay in the city until she and her husband left it.
Nay, more, she even asked the maiden to promise to go with them when
they set out for the castle of Ringstetten, which stood on the banks
of the river Danube, and Bertalda was well pleased with this request.

One evening they three together walked up and down in the public
square. In the midst of the square stood a beautiful fountain, and
here they lingered to watch the water as it tumbled and tossed. So
violently did it do this that it seemed as though the fountain must
break, and the water, bursting its bonds, must flow away far and free.

At that moment a tall man came towards them from the market-place,
and, bowing to the knight and Bertalda, he drew the young wife aside
that he might speak to her alone.

Huldbrand looked at the stranger, and as he looked he felt sure that
he had seen him before. He grew a little angry, this hasty knight, as
he watched his wife and the stranger whispering together. He caught a
few words too, and they seemed to him to be in a foreign language, and
this displeased him yet more.

At this moment, however, Undine left the stranger. As she came toward
her husband she was laughing merrily and clapping her hands.

But the stranger, as she left him, shook his head and frowned. Then he
walked with great strides toward the fountain, and stepping into it he
vanished and was seen no more.

'It is Kühleborn, the spirit of the forest stream--I know him now,'
thought Huldbrand to himself.

But Bertalda seemed to see nothing unusual about the stranger. She
thought he was the Master of the fountain, and turning to Undine she
asked her what the man had said to make her laugh so gaily.

'The day after to-morrow is your birthday, dear Bertalda,' said
Undine. 'Wait only until then, and I will tell you the reason of my
joy.'

Then, saying farewell to Bertalda, Undine and the knight walked toward
their home.

'Was it Kühleborn who spoke to you by the fountain?' asked Huldbrand,
and his voice sounded cold, for he did not wish to be reminded of his
wife's strange relations.

'It was he,' answered Undine. 'He told me tidings that made me
rejoice. I will tell you without delay, should you desire it, what the
tidings were. Yet if you will but wait until Bertalda's birthday, you
will give me great pleasure, and you yourself will enjoy a great
surprise.'

Listening to her gentle words, the knight forgot the ill-humour he had
but lately felt, and willingly he agreed to wait until she herself
wished to tell him the good news.

And Undine, as she fell asleep that night, was smiling happily.
'Bertalda, dear Bertalda,' she murmured, 'how she will rejoice when I
tell her the tidings brought to me by him whom she calls the Master of
the fountain.'




CHAPTER X

THE BIRTHDAY FEAST


It had been Undine's wish to give a great banquet in honour of
Bertalda's birthday. The knight had ordered that all should be done as
she desired.

The feast was now spread, and the guests, of whom there were a great
number, had already taken their seats.

At the upper end of the table sat Bertalda, surrounded with flowers
and jewels, gifts these which her foster-parents and friends had
showered upon her. By her side sat the knight and his fair young wife.

When at length the fruit was placed on the table, the doors of the
banqueting-room were flung open. (In Germany, where the knight lived,
it was usual to do this that the peasant folk might look in and see
how their masters fared.) Wine and cakes were offered to those who on
this evening came to show their pleasure in the joy of the knight and
his young wife.

Huldbrand and Bertalda, meanwhile, were watching Undine with eager
eyes. Had she not a secret to tell them, which, when they knew it,
would make them even happier than before?

But Undine only smiled upon them as she caught their eyes, and shook
her head slightly as though to say, 'No, it is still too soon, too
soon.'

At this moment the guests begged the young mistress of the feast to
sing. She seemed pleased with the request, and taking her lute in her
hands, she began to play softly, while her clear voice filled the
room.

It was a song of sunshine and green grass, of sweet flowers and
sparkling waters, and the guests, listening spellbound, forgot all
else save the singer and her song.

But hark! the song is changing. Who is the child of whom Undine sings?
A child who has been borne by the waves far from the home of her
birth. The little one is lying like a flower among the meadow grass
(the guests can see her as the singer sings) and reaches out her tiny
hands for help.

Ah! now they hear the tramp, tramp of a horse. A noble duke is riding
slowly along. He halts, for he sees the little maid. He stoops and
lifts her in his arms, and carries her off to his own castle, and
surrounds her with splendour and with wealth.

And now tears gather in the eyes of the guests. The song is drawing to
a close, and Undine is singing of an unknown shore, where in a little
cottage sit a father and mother, desolate and sad, for they have lost
their little child, and they know not where to find her.

Among all the guests were none who listened to the song more eagerly
than Bertalda's noble foster-parents.

'She has sung the story of Bertalda, the little child we found so long
ago,' they said each to the other. 'It was even thus we found her in
the meadow, among the flowers.'

And Bertalda herself cried out in haste, 'Undine, Undine, you know my
parents, bring them to me, bring them to me, I entreat you!'

Then Undine, with tears that were tears of joy in her eyes, looked at
Bertalda, and said softly, 'They are here, your parents are here, dear
maiden, and when you see them you will rejoice. Well do I know the
tender care they will give to you, for it was even they who were my
own foster-parents.'

At a sign from Undine the old fisherman and his wife now stepped
forward from the corner in which their foster-child had bidden them
wait. It was she, Undine, who had sent for them that they might claim
Bertalda, who was, as Kühleborn told her, their child.

The eyes of all the guests were fixed in astonishment on the humble
fisherman and his wife. Could these poor working folk be indeed the
parents of the maiden who stood before them, so cold, so full of
pride?

'Yes, here is your long-lost daughter,' said Undine softly, as the old
people stood bewildered before Bertalda. Then they, taking courage
from her words, threw their arms around their daughter. And as they
embraced her, tears streamed down their old worn faces, while they
thanked God for His goodness in giving them back their child.

But Bertalda tore herself from their arms. She, the child of a poor
old fisherman and his wife! She could not believe it. She did not wish
to believe it. In her pride she had hoped to be known as the daughter
of a beautiful princess, or even of a queen. Now in her anger she
believed that Undine had brought the fisherman and his wife to the
banquet only to crush her pride and to humble her before Huldbrand and
his guests.

The angry maiden took no pains to hide her rage. She reproached
Undine, Undine who had only wished to give her joy, nor had she any
words too bitter to fling at the fisherman and his wife.

And Undine, who had hoped to make her friend and her foster-parents
happy, listened sadly, now to Bertalda, now to the old fisherman and
his wife.

'Bertalda,' she cried, 'Bertalda, do not be angry. Have you not a
soul? Let it teach you not to grieve your parents more.'

But Bertalda only grew more angry, and the poor parents, as they heard
her scorn, more sad.

As for the guests, they were talking loudly, some being sorry for the
maiden, others for the fisherman and his wife.

Then Undine begged the knight to let her speak to their guests. And he
yielding to her wish, she walked to the upper end of the table, and
while all eyes were fixed upon her, she spoke.

'My secret, which I thought would cause Bertalda joy, has caused her
sorrow. Yet must I tell you that I have spoken the truth. For he who
told me was he who, when Bertalda was but a little babe, drew her into
the water, and thereafter laid her in the green meadow through which
the duke rode toward his castle.'

'Do not listen to her words!' shouted Bertalda in her rage. 'She is a
witch, a witch!'

'Nay, I am no witch. Look upon me that you may know,' answered Undine.
And as they gazed upon her pure face and into her clear blue eyes, the
guests knew that she spoke the truth. Undine was not a witch.

'If she is not a witch, she at least has not told the truth,' cried
Bertalda, scorn in her cold voice. 'She has no proof that I am the
child of these wretched old people.' Then, turning to her noble
foster-parents, she entreated them to take her away at once from the
city, where such shame had been brought upon her.

But the duke did not move, while the duchess said in a firm voice, 'We
shall not leave this room, nor shall you, proud maiden, until we know
the truth.'

Then the fisherman's wife drew near to the noble lady, and curtsying
low she said, 'Should this bad maiden be indeed my daughter, as I do
think she is, she will have between her shoulders a mark like a
violet, and this mark also you will find on the instep of her left
foot. Let the maiden come with me that--'

But Bertalda rudely interrupted the old woman's words.

'I will not go with the peasant!' she said.

'But you will come with me into another room,' said the duchess, and
Bertalda knew that she would have to go. 'And the old woman shall come
with us,' added the noble lady in a kind voice.

As the three went out of the banqueting-room, silence fell upon the
guests. Now they would soon know the truth.

Slowly the moments passed. At length the door opened and the duchess
returned with Bertalda and the old woman. Bertalda looked pale and
frightened.

'It is but just,' said the noble lady, looking round the room, 'it is
but just that you should know the truth. It is as our hostess has
said. Bertalda is indeed the daughter of the fisherman and his wife.'

The duke and duchess then left the room, followed by their
foster-child, the duke bidding Bertalda's true parents come with them
also.

In silence the other guests slipped away, to talk in their own homes
over all that they had heard and seen, and Undine, left alone with her
husband, wept bitterly.




CHAPTER XI

THE JOURNEY TO CASTLE RINGSTETTEN


The knight did all he could to comfort his wife, and although he was
sorry to see her tears, he was glad to think that she, who had been so
wild and wilful, had now a soul so kind and loving.

'If it is true that Undine has won through love a soul, it is one more
pure than mortals know,' he thought to himself.

As he comforted his wife Huldbrand made up his mind to take her away
from the city as soon as possible.

In the city the lady Bertalda was well known, and people talked of the
strange story of her birth. But among them all none was heard to say
an unkind word about Undine, while many there were who blamed Bertalda
for her cruel behaviour toward her friend and the poor old fisherman
and his wife. But this neither the knight nor his lady knew, nor
would it have comforted Undine had she been told.

The morning after the feast a beautiful carriage stood at the door.
Huldbrand and his wife were ready to set out on their journey to the
castle of Ringstetten.

As the knight and Undine were stepping into the carriage a fisher-girl
drew near, and begged them to buy her fish.

'We are leaving the city, we do not need any fish,' said the knight
courteously. But at the sound of his voice the girl burst into tears,
and Huldbrand saw with surprise that it was Bertalda who had spoken to
him.

'Why do you weep so bitterly?' asked Undine, drawing Bertalda into the
house, and the maiden, who had no pride left, told her story.

'My foster-parents,' she said between her sobs, 'my foster-parents are
so displeased with my cruel behaviour to you and to the old fisherman
and his wife, that they no longer wish me to live with them. They have
given me a large sum of money and have sent me away into the wide
world. The fisherman and his wife, to whom they have also given gifts,
have gone back to their cottage by the lake. I was too fearful to wish
to be left alone in the world, and fain would I have gone with them to
their simple home, but he who is said to be my father--'

[Illustration: At the sound of his voice the girl burst into tears]

'In truth he is your father,' interrupted Undine, and her voice was
grave.

'Even if he be my father,' answered Bertalda, 'yet would he not take
me with him to his cottage. Did I care for him or for his wife, he
said, I would not fear to journey alone through the haunted forest,
until I found my home. Nor would he welcome me should I go to him
dressed in aught save the dress of a fisher-girl. Although the thought
of the forest makes me tremble, yet will I do as he has said. But
first I have come to you, gentle lady,' and as she spoke Bertalda
looked entreatingly at Undine, 'I have come to ask your forgiveness
for my behaviour yesterday. I believe that you did indeed wish to give
me joy by bringing my poor parents to the feast. O forgive me, forgive
all the bold and unkind words I spoke, for indeed I am very unhappy.'

But the gentle Undine would let the miserable maiden say no more. She
threw her arms around Bertalda's neck, and said, 'Bertalda, dear
Bertalda, you shall live with me and be my sister. You shall come with
me to Ringstetten this very day.'

The maiden dried her tears and looked timidly at the knight. He also
felt sorry for Bertalda, nor did it please him to think of her
venturing alone into the forest. Too well he knew the terrors which
might surround her there. He took her hand, as he saw her timid look,
and said in a gentle voice, 'You shall live with us at Ringstetten,
and I and my wife will take care of you. But lest the good old
fisherman is troubled as the days pass and you do not reach the
cottage, I will send to tell him that you have come with us and are
safe at Castle Ringstetten.' Then, giving Bertalda his arm, he placed
her in the carriage with Undine. The knight himself mounted his horse
and rode along gaily by their side, and soon they left the city and
all sad thoughts behind.

At length, one fair summer evening, the travellers reached
Ringstetten. There was much to make the knight busy after his long
absence, and thus it was that Undine and Bertalda spent many days
alone together. Often they would walk in the beautiful country which
lay without the castle grounds.

One day, as they wandered along the banks of the river Danube, a tall
man came toward them, and would have spoken to Undine. But Undine,
gentle as were her ways, had no welcome for the stranger. When she saw
him, a frown crossed her sweet face and she bid him at once begone.
Shaking his head the tall man yet obeyed, and walking with hasty steps
toward a little wood, he soon disappeared.

'Is not the stranger he who spoke to you in the city, the Master of
the fountain?' cried Bertalda fearfully. She would always be afraid of
the man who had told Undine the secret of her birth.

'Fear nothing, dear Bertalda,' said Undine hastily, 'the Master of the
fountain shall not do you harm. I will tell you who he is, and then
you will no longer be afraid. His name is Kühleborn and he is my
uncle. It was he who carried you away from your mother's arms and put
me there in your place.'

Then, as Bertalda listened with wide open eyes, Undine told her of her
childhood's home in the crystal palace under the blue sea, and of the
free and careless life she had lived in the cottage by the lake. She
told her, too, of the coming of the knight, and of their wedding-day,
when she had won for herself a soul, a gift given to no Undine save
through the power of love.

Bertalda listened to the strange story in silence, but as she listened
she felt a faint feeling of dread creep into her heart. And the
feeling grew and grew until at last it seemed to stand as a wall
between her and the gentle Undine.

At supper that evening she began to be sorry for the knight, who had
married a lady beautiful indeed and good, yet one who seemed to belong
to another world than theirs.




CHAPTER XII

CASTLE RINGSTETTEN


Now as the days passed, a change crept over those who dwelt in the
castle.

Huldbrand saw that Bertalda seemed to shrink away from his beautiful
wife. And when at length he asked her the reason that she no longer
loved Undine so well as she had been used to do, she told him that she
now knew from whence his wife had come. 'And for the spirit world,'
said Bertalda, 'I do not care, for I know it not. It and those who
have dwelt there fill me with fear and dread.'

Little by little the knight himself began to look at his wife with
less loving eyes, little by little he began to shun her presence.

Then Undine, seeing that her husband's love grew less, wept, and the
knight, seeing her tears, would speak kindly to her, yet even as he
spoke he would leave her side to walk with Bertalda.

She, Bertalda, meanwhile grew once more rude and proud, nor could
Undine's patience win her to behave more wisely.

Then in the long dark passages of the old castle, spectres began to
appear to Huldbrand and Bertalda, and worse than any was the tall form
of Kühleborn, or the Master of the fountain, as the maiden still
called him.

Now one day, when Huldbrand had ridden to the hunt, Undine gathered
all her servants together in the court of the castle and bade them
bring a big stone to cover up the fountain which stood in the middle
of the square.

The servants, who loved their mistress, hastened to obey her commands.
A huge stone was carried into the court, and was just about to be
placed on the fountain when Bertalda came hurriedly to the spot.

'The fountain must not be closed,' she cried haughtily, 'for it is
from it that water is drawn for my daily bath.'

But Undine, who on other days had often given way to the wishes of
Bertalda, was to-day determined that her will should be done.

'It is I who am mistress of the castle in the absence of my lord,' she
said, and her voice was firm though it was kind, 'and the fountain
shall be closed as I have commanded.'

'But look,' cried Bertalda angrily, 'the water itself bubbles and
heaves as though disturbed at the thought of being shut out from the
glad sunshine.'

The water was indeed, as the maiden said, fretting against the stones
and throwing out sudden jets as though in a violent passion.

The more excited grew the water, however, the more determined grew
Undine to have her order fulfilled, and that without delay.

As for the servants, they had no wish to please the haughty Bertalda,
they were even glad to disobey her when that might be.

Accordingly they no longer delayed to do the will of their gentle
mistress, and the stone was soon placed securely over the opening of
the fountain. Undine then bent over it and silently wrote on the top
of the stone some strange letters.

That evening, when Huldbrand came home, Bertalda met him with tears in
her eyes, and complained to him of his wife's strange conduct.

'Tell me why you have ordered that the fountain should be sealed,'
said the knight, turning sullenly to his wife. 'It was a strange
deed.'

'I will tell you the reason when we are alone,' said Undine. 'It was
a grave one indeed.'

'It matters not if Bertalda should hear,' said the knight, and he did
not hide the impatience that he felt.

'I will tell you in her presence if you so desire,' said Undine, 'but
I beseech you, desire it not.'

As the knight looked into her pleading face and let her sweet voice
steal into his heart, he grew ashamed of himself. How could he ever be
unkind to so fair, so good a wife!

Thinking thus Huldbrand did not speak, but he drew Undine gently from
the room, that she might speak to him alone as she wished to do.

'Ah, now I can tell you,' said Undine, and she smiled in her content.
'You know that Kühleborn, my uncle, has begun to haunt the castle. I
send him away in my displeasure, yet again and again he returns. Now I
have shut the door by which he comes, and here he will disturb our
peace no more. It is true that the stone can easily be raised by
strong men, in spite of the letters which I wrote upon it. If you wish
to do as Bertalda demands, remove the stone, yet do I warn you that
Kühleborn may well harm the maiden, for against her he bears more
ill-will than he does against others.'

Once more, as Huldbrand listened to his wife, he was ashamed. So
gentle was she, so kind to the haughty maiden who but mocked at her
for all her love. Peerless indeed was the soul of his beautiful wife,
and once again love for her sprang up within his heart.

'The stone shall not be removed, nor shall anything that you order be
undone, my sweet Undine,' said the knight.

At these words, and yet more at the kindness of his voice, Undine
rejoiced. Then, seizing Huldbrand's hand, she begged him to grant her
one request.

'If at any time, in the days that are to come,' she said, 'you upbraid
me, promise that this you will never do while we are sailing or while
we are near to sea or lake or tiny rivulet. For should one of my race
hear you use harsh words toward me, then would they regain their
power, and snatch me away from you for ever. Then would I be forced to
dwell all the rest of my life in the crystal palace below the blue
sea. Nor could I ever come up to you unless, indeed, I was sent by my
kindred, when alas! only great sadness would befall us both. Promise
me, therefore, that when we are near water, you will remember what I
have now told you.'

Huldbrand promised, and hand in hand they went in search of Bertalda.

She meanwhile had called together some workmen, and as she saw the
knight and Undine drawing near, she gave her orders to the men in a
loud, discontented voice. 'The stone may now be removed. Hasten, see
that it be done immediately!'

But the knight was angry with the maiden for daring thus to give what
orders she pleased, and he shouted at once, so that the workmen might
hear, 'The stone shall stay where it is! It shall not be removed!'

And the men went away, well pleased that they need not undo what their
gentle mistress had ordered to be done.

Huldbrand then reproved Bertalda for her rude behaviour to his wife,
but she scarcely heard his words, as she turned away in anger and
hastened to her room.

Soon supper was placed on the table, but Huldbrand and Undine waited
in vain for Bertalda. At length they sent a servant to call her, but
the maid came back only to tell them that she was nowhere to be found.
In her room, however, a letter had been left addressed to the knight.
Huldbrand opened it hastily and read:--

'Forgive me, Sir Knight, that I have forgotten that I am only a poor
fisher-girl. I will go to my father's miserable cottage, where I
cannot well commit the same fault again. Fare you well, you and your
beautiful wife.'

'You must go without delay to seek her and bring her back,' said
Undine.

And Huldbrand did not need to be urged. Already he had ordered his
horse to be saddled that he might ride after the maiden.

In vain he asked the servants in what direction Bertalda had gone. No
one had seen her. It was only as the knight impatiently mounted his
steed, that a page ran up to him crying, 'The lady Bertalda rode
toward the Black Valley.'

Without a pause the knight darted off in the direction of the valley.
He did not hear his wife's voice crying after him, 'Huldbrand,
Huldbrand, go not there, not to the valley, Huldbrand, or, if go you
must, take me, I entreat of you.'

Then when Undine saw that her cry was unheard, she ordered her palfrey
to be saddled instantly, and mounting it, she rode forth alone to
follow the knight into the Black Valley.




CHAPTER XIII

THE BLACK VALLEY


The Black Valley was a gloomy place. Fir-trees grew tall and dark on
the banks of the stream, casting strange shadows on the sunny waters.

As the knight entered the valley, evening had fallen and the stream
rushed, dark and sullen, between the rocks.

Huldbrand glanced anxiously from side to side, but no trace could be
found of the maiden whom he sought. He began to fear lest already she
were in peril, and thinking thus he urged his horse yet further into
the valley.

Peering through the bushes as he rode, he at length caught sight of
something white lying on the ground. Had he found Bertalda at last?

He spurred his horse onward toward the white gleam which had caught
his eye, but the animal no sooner saw the object which had gladdened
his master's eye than it started violently and refused to move. Then
the knight dismounted, and tying his now rearing steed to an elm, he
pushed his way on foot through the brushwood.

Thunder began to rumble around the mountains, and the evening dew fell
cold and damp on the anxious knight.

He could still see the white figure lying on the ground, but as he
drew nearer to it a strange dread struck at Huldbrand's heart.

'Was Bertalda asleep,' he wondered, 'or did she lie there unconscious,
perchance even dead?'

He was close to her now, bending over her. She never stirred. He
rustled the branches, rattled his sword. Still she lay there quiet,
motionless. He called her by her name, 'Bertalda!' but no voice
answered him. He called again, more loud, 'Bertalda!' but only a
sorrowful echo answered his cry.

Then the knight bent nearer yet to the maiden, but darkness hid the
face on which he longed to gaze.

Suddenly the whole valley was bright as at mid-day. A vivid flash of
lightning showed to Huldbrand the face over which he bent.

It was a terrible face. And a voice, awful as the face, rang out harsh
and hollow.

With a cry of terror the knight sprang away from the horrid vision.
But was it a vision? Huldbrand knew that it was creeping after him,
and he could catch some muttered words. 'Get you gone, get you gone,'
he heard, 'there are evil spirits abroad. Get you gone, or I shall
seize you and hold you fast,' and the white figure stretched out his
bony arms to catch him. Ah! now the knight knew who it was that had
given him so cruel a fright. It was none other than Kühleborn, the
malicious water spirit.

Seizing his sword, Huldbrand struck fiercely at the white figure, only
however to see it vanish, while a heavy shower of water drenched him
from head to foot.

'He may wish to drive me away, but he shall not succeed in doing so,'
murmured the knight. 'Bertalda shall not be left to the vengeance of
this evil spirit.'

Huldbrand now turned back to go to his horse, but ere he reached the
animal, he heard in the distance a sound of weeping. It reached his
ears even though the thunder still rolled and the wind still blew. He
hastened towards the spot from which the sound seemed to come. There,
on the hillside, trying to climb up out of the darkness of the valley,
he found Bertalda.

The maiden was too glad to see Huldbrand to remember how but lately he
had angered her. She clung to him, calling him her deliverer, her
knight, for to her too the valley had been full of horrible forms and
strange visions.

Soothing her with kind words, Huldbrand led the maiden toward his
horse.

But no sooner did the animal see his master approach with Bertalda on
his arm than it began to rear, beating the air madly with its
forefeet.

It was not possible to mount Bertalda, and the knight soon gave up the
attempt. He drew the horse gently forward by the bridle, while with
his other arm he supported the fearful maiden.

But Bertalda, though she was anxious to escape from the dark valley,
could walk but slowly, and at each step her strength grew less. For
Kühleborn had played her many pranks ere she had been found. The storm
also had bruised her slender form.

At length she slipped from the knight's arm, and falling on the grass,
she sighed, 'Leave me, noble knight, leave me to suffer the punishment
I deserve.'

'I will never leave you, dear Bertalda,' cried the knight. As he
spoke, the steed began to plunge even more furiously than before. It
was impossible for Huldbrand to control the animal. All he could do
was to force it away a few paces from where the maiden lay, for he
feared lest the horse should trample her to death.

He had gone but a few steps when he heard her calling to him,
'Huldbrand, Huldbrand, leave me not alone,' for already all her
courage had faded away.

As he hesitated, the knight heard the wheels of a wagon rumble slowly
over the rough road that led through the valley. He at once called to
the driver to come to his help. A man's voice called back quickly,
'Have but patience, and I will come.'

Soon afterwards Huldbrand saw two white horses appear through the
trees. Then a wagon covered with a great white hood was to be seen,
and last of all the driver, who was dressed in a white carter's frock.

The driver drew near to the knight and tried to help him to quiet his
frightened steed.

'Do you know, Sir Knight, why your good horse shivers thus?' asked the
carter, 'for if not I can tell you. A bad water spirit dwells in this
valley, and often he would bewitch my horses when first I ventured
through it. But now I have learned a little spell. If you wish it, I
will whisper it in the ear of your steed, and he will stand steady as
my greys.'

'You may try your spell,' said the knight, 'though I fear that it will
be of but little use.'

Then the driver of the wagon went quietly up to the panting steed, and
said a few words to it. At once the horse stood still, without a trace
of the fear which had made it so restless and unmanageable.

Huldbrand had no time to wonder what the wagoner had said to his
horse. He was too eager to get Bertalda out of the valley to think of
anything else.

'My wagon will take the fair lady safely back to Ringstetten,' said
the wagoner. 'She may sit in it in comfort, for it is filled with bags
of the softest cotton.'

The knight was glad to accept this offer, and as his horse, though
quiet, was tired and weary, Huldbrand himself was easily persuaded
that he also should ride in the wagon with Bertalda, while his steed
was fastened behind.

'It is well,' said the wagoner, 'that the road is downhill. My trusty
greys will step out bravely.'

Thus they started, the driver walking by the side of his wagon.

And Bertalda and the knight did not heed the jolting of the wagon, as
they sat side by side on the soft bags of cotton.

Suddenly they were startled by a loud shout from the driver.

'Steady, now, my trusty greys, steady, lest you fall.'

Already the wagon was in the midst of a stream of rushing water, and
it seemed as though the horses must be carried off their feet. The
wagoner had sprung into the wagon untouched by the swirling waters.

'This is a strange way by which to drive us,' said Huldbrand to the
wagoner. 'It seems to go right into the middle of the stream.'

'Nay, now, Sir Knight,' laughed the driver, 'if you look again, you
will see that it is the stream which is rushing across our path. See,
it has overflowed its banks.'

The knight looked and saw that the whole valley was being rapidly
flooded. Then, all at once, he knew that this was Kühleborn's doing.

'It is Kühleborn,' he cried aloud, 'Kühleborn the water spirit, who is
doing his utmost to drown us. Do you not know a spell against his
power?'

'Yea, by my troth I know a spell,' answered the wagoner, 'but ere I
use it, I must tell you who I am.'

'I care not who you may be,' shouted the angry knight. 'See you not
that there is no time to lose. The water is rising rapidly.'

'Nevertheless,' answered the man,' you shall hear my name, for I am
Kühleborn!'

He laughed a mocking laugh, and at that moment the wagon seemed to
disappear, and Bertalda and the knight were struggling in the flood.
Above them rose the wagoner, who was indeed, as he had said,
Kühleborn. Taller and taller he towered above them, until he seemed at
last to change into a great white wave.

With horror-stricken eyes the maiden and the knight saw the wave swoop
down upon the noble steed, which had been vainly struggling in the
water. Then slowly once more the wave reared itself higher and higher
yet above the heads of the two who watched and waited until they too
should be for ever buried beneath the waters.

But ere the great white wave rolled down upon them, they were saved.
Through the tumult of the waters a sweet voice floated to Bertalda and
the knight. Then, as the moon broke through the clouds, they saw
Undine on a hill looking down into the valley.

She rebuked the waters, she even threatened the vast wave that towered
above Bertalda and the knight, until muttering gloomily it vanished
from their sight.

As the waters ran more quietly through the valley, Undine flew to them
swiftly as a bird and drew them up out of reach of the water. Bidding
them rest a while, for they were weary, she went a little way off to
fetch her white palfrey. Then, telling the knight to place Bertalda on
the saddle, she led them safely back to the castle.




CHAPTER XIV

HULDBRAND FORGETS HIS PROMISE


Undine was full of joy when she had saved Bertalda and Huldbrand from
the dangers of the Black Valley, and brought them back safely to
Castle Ringstetten. Her joy grew daily greater as her husband became
kind and gentle to her as he had used to be when they dwelt together
in the cottage by the lake. Indeed the knight had grown ashamed of his
careless words and ways. He would never again speak harshly to Undine
or leave her side to spend long hours with Bertalda; so he thought to
himself. For when she had hastened to save him and the maiden from the
doom which had all but overtaken them, he had seen once more, in a
flash, the soul of his beautiful young wife. It shone before him now,
fair and spotless in its beauty.

Bertalda, too, had been touched by the goodness of her friend. She no
longer wished to mock her gentle words, and though her heart was
cold, she grew more humble.

Thus trouble and care passed away from Ringstetten, and spectres no
longer haunted the dark corners of the castle.

Winter came, cold and chill, but it had no power to freeze the hearts
of Undine and the knight.

Spring came, and the trees grew green, and the sky shone more blue,
and the little birds began to use their wings. Soon the swallows and
the storks came home from their long winter journeys. And those in the
castle, as they thought of the fair countries these had seen, began
themselves to wish to travel.

One beautiful evening Huldbrand with his wife and Bertalda walked
along the banks of the river Danube. The knight, who had ofttimes
sailed down the river, told them tales of the wonderful countries
through which it flowed, and of the beautiful town of Vienna, which
rose so proudly on its banks.

'Ah!' said Bertalda, 'how I wish we might sail to this city of which
you tell.'

And Undine, ever anxious to give pleasure to her friend, said, 'Yes,
let us visit Vienna while the spring is still fair.' Huldbrand also
was pleased at the thought of the journey, only once he bent toward
Undine and whispered, 'Kühleborn, will we not be in his power if we
sail down the river?'

His beautiful wife only laughed. She was too happy now to fear her
uncle's power.

They therefore got ready for the journey with much merriment and many
hopes.

When at length the three travellers, with their attendants, set out on
their voyage, it seemed as though all would be as joyful as they had
wished. As they sailed on, the river grew more broad, more green the
grasses too in the rich meadow-lands.

But erelong a shadow crept across their joy. The river, indeed, flowed
smooth as before, the country smiled only more graciously upon the
travellers, but Kühleborn had already begun to show that on this part
of the river he could use his power.

Undine, it is true, reproved her uncle before he had done more than
play a few tricks upon them. Yet though he would cease his pranks when
she spoke, it was but a few moments before he was as troublesome as
ever.

Soon the crew began to crowd together, whispering fearfully and
glancing timidly at the knight and his fair ladies. Kühleborn was
making them afraid.

Huldbrand saw their strange glances and he began to grow angry. He
even muttered crossly, 'This is Undine's mad uncle come to disturb us.
I would her strange kindred would leave us alone.'

Thinking thus, the knight looked with displeasure at his poor wife.
She knew but too well what his glance meant, and worn out with sorrow
and with her constant watch over Kühleborn, she at length fell fast
asleep.

But no sooner were her eyes closed than her uncle again began his
tiresome tricks.

It seemed to the sailors, and indeed to all on board, that they were
bewitched, for look which way each one would, there before him,
peering out of the water, was the head of a very ugly man.

Each man turned, in his terror, to point out to his fellow the hideous
head. But on every face the same horror was already painted. Then when
each tried to tell the other what each one had seen, they ended by
crying out together, 'See, here is the face! nay, look, it is here!'

Undine awoke as the terrified crew broke into loud screams, and as she
opened her eyes the ugly faces vanished.

But Huldbrand had not been frightened. He had been growing more and
more angry, and now he would have spoken roughly to his wife, had she
not pleaded with loving eyes and soft voice, 'For God's sake, rebuke
me not while we are on the water. Bethink you of your promise.'

The knight was silent, for well he remembered how Undine had entreated
him never to reprove her while she was near water.

Then she, seeing he was silent, whispered, 'Let us give up this
voyage, for now has our joy turned into sadness. Let us go back to the
castle where nothing can disturb us.'

Huldbrand, however, was not to be so easily restored to good humour.
He answered her crossly, 'Why should I have to stay shut up at home?
Even there can I have quiet only so long as the fountain remains
sealed. I wish that your foolish kinsfolk--'

He could say no more, for Undine's hand was over his lips, and her
voice was beseeching him to be silent.

Meanwhile Bertalda sat quietly in the ship, thinking of all the
strange things that had happened. As she sat thus thinking, she
unfastened a golden necklace which the knight had given to her, and
holding it in her hand over the side of the bark she drew it
carelessly through the water. Then dreamily she watched it as it
gleamed and glistened in the light of the setting sun.

All at once a huge white hand came up out of the river, seized the
necklace, and disappeared with it below the water.

Bertalda shrieked in terror, and a mocking laugh answered her cry.

Then could the anger of the knight no longer be concealed. He sprang
up, shouting to the water spirits to claim no kinship with him, but to
come and learn from his sword-thrusts how much he hated them.

The maiden meanwhile wept for her lost necklace. But Undine had thrust
her hand into the water, and was murmuring strange words to herself,
stopping from time to time to say to her husband, 'Chide me not here,
Huldbrand, chide me not here, lest you lose me for ever.'

And, indeed, though the knight shook with rage, yet he spoke no word
of reproach to his wife.

At length Undine drew out the hand which she had been holding under
the water, and in it she held a coral necklace of wondrous beauty.

'Take it and weep no longer,' she said in her gentle voice, and she
held the necklace out toward Bertalda. 'I have had it brought to me
from the palaces below the sea. Grieve no longer for the one which you
have lost.'

But the knight saw in the necklace only another sign of Undine's
strange dealings with the water spirits. He sprang between Bertalda
and his wife and snatched from Undine's hand the beautiful necklace,
flinging it far away into the river. Then in his passion he turned to
his wife, and cried, 'Go and abide with your kindred! You are a witch,
go, dwell with those who are as you are, and take with you your gifts!
Go, trouble us no more!'

Undine looked at Huldbrand. Tears were in her blue eyes, and she wept
as a little blameless child might weep.

'Alas, beloved,' she sighed, 'farewell! No harm shall touch you while
I have power to shield you from evil. Alas, alas! why have you sent me
hence?'

She seemed to glide as she spoke over the edge of the bark, and be
drawn down into the river. And the little waves lapped against the
boat and seemed to sob as they whispered, 'Alas, alas!'

No sooner had the knight spoken than he knew what he had done. He had
lost his wife, his beautiful fair-souled Undine. He lay on the deck
stretching out empty arms, shedding bitter tears, until at length his
misery made the strong man swoon.

[Illustration: The little waves seemed to sob as they whispered,
'Alas! alas!']




CHAPTER XV

HULDBRAND AND BERTALDA


When he recovered, the knight of Ringstetten went back to his castle
with Bertalda. So bitterly did he mourn the loss of his gentle wife,
that at length he began to believe that he would never cease to weep
for her. Bertalda wept by his side, and for a long time they lived
quietly together, thinking and talking of none save the beautiful
Undine.

But as the months passed by, Huldbrand began to think a little less
and yet a little less of his beautiful lost wife.

Now about this time the old fisherman appeared at the castle. He had
come to tell the knight that it was time that his daughter Bertalda
should come to live with him in his lonely cottage by the lake.

Then the knight began to think how strange and silent it would be in
the castle if Bertalda left him. The more he thought about it the
more he disliked the thought of being left alone.

At length he spoke to the fisherman and begged him not to take
Bertalda away. 'Let her stay with me and be my wife,' said the knight.

And in time the fisherman yielded to the wishes of the knight, and the
wedding-day was fixed.

Then a letter was sent to Father Heilman, begging him to come without
delay to the castle that he might perform the wedding-rite between the
knight and the lady Bertalda. Now Father Heilman was the very priest
who had wedded Huldbrand to Undine in the cottage by the lake.

When the priest had read Huldbrand's letter he hastened at once to the
castle.

Huldbrand and Bertalda were sitting side by side under the trees, the
fisherman near them, when they saw the priest enter the court.

They all rose eagerly to welcome him, but Father Heilman began to
speak without delay.

'Sir Knight, I have come with as great haste as my old limbs would
carry me to tell you that I do not believe the beautiful Undine is
dead. Last night and for many nights before, she was with me in my
dreams, wringing her white hands, and crying, "Ah, holy Father, I
live, I live. Let not Huldbrand forget me, for should he wed again
great danger may, alas, come to him, nor will I have power to shield
him. Help me, therefore, holy Father." What the dream meant I knew not
until your letter reached me. Now have I come, not to marry you to
Bertalda, but to tell you that Undine, your wife, is yet alive.'

The knight himself, as well as Bertalda and the fisherman, believed in
their hearts that what the priest said was true, yet would they not
own that they believed his words. Even the old fisherman, who so
dearly loved his foster-child, thought that as the marriage with
Bertalda had been arranged, it were well it should take place without
more delay.

They all, therefore, refused to listen to the priest, when he
reproached them for their conduct. They even told him, what was not
really true, that they did not believe his foolish dreams.

Sadly shaking his head, the priest left the castle. He saw that should
he speak again no one would listen to his words. Nor would he linger
to taste any of the refreshments that were placed before him. He had
failed to make any one believe his dream, and he was too sad to eat.

The following morning the knight sent to the nearest monastery for a
priest, who promised to wed him to Bertalda in a few days.




CHAPTER XVI

BERTALDA'S WEDDING


The wedding-day dawned bright and clear, the guests assembled in the
castle and wore their gayest garments, yet over everything there
brooded a dark cloud. It seemed to the knight, as well as to his
guests, that some one was missing from the feast, and the thoughts of
all turned to the beautiful Undine.

The bride seemed happier than any one else, yet even she knew a cloud
was in her sky.

Slowly the hours of the wedding-day dragged on, but at length the
ceremony was over, the feast ended, and the guests ready to depart.

When they had gone, Bertalda, thinking to dispel the gloom which had
now fallen upon her spirit, told her maids to spread out before her
all her rich jewels and gorgeous robes. She would choose to-night the
garments in which she would array herself on the morrow.

Her waiting-maids did as they were told, and when the dresses and
jewels were spread out before their new mistress, they began to
flatter her and tell her that none was fairer than she.

Bertalda listened with pleasure to their praises. Then looking at
herself in the mirror she sighed. 'Alas, but see these little brown
spots that have appeared on my neck.'

The maids saw indeed, as their mistress said, that there were freckles
on her neck, but still they flattered her, saying that the little
spots only made her skin look the whiter.

But Bertalda did not believe their words. She wanted to get rid of the
freckles that had only lately appeared on her slender throat.

'Had I but water from the fountain, the spots would vanish in a day,'
she cried pettishly.

Then one of Bertalda's maids thought to herself, 'My mistress shall
have the water she so much desires,' and laughing gaily to herself,
she slipped from the room.

In but a few moments heavy footsteps were heard in the court below.
The footsteps tramped backward and forward.

Bertalda, looking from her window, smiled, for she saw that the noisy
steps were those of workmen, who were busy removing the stone which
had been placed over the fountain. She guessed that this was the doing
of one of her maids, but she still smiled contentedly. The freckles
would not spoil her beauty for another day. The water from the
fountain would make them disappear, and that was all she cared about
just then.

At first the workmen tried in vain to remove the stone. Perhaps some
of them, remembering that their sweet young mistress Undine had
ordered it to be placed there, did not try very hard to lift it from
its place. All at once, however, the stone began to move. It almost
seemed as though it were being pushed up from beneath. It moved
slowly, then seemed to rise up into the air, after which it rolled on
to the pavement with a tremendous crash.

Then slowly, slowly there rose out of the mouth of the well a white
figure, veiled and weeping. And those who gazed spellbound at the
sight saw that the figure which stepped from the fountain was that of
a woman. Weeping and wringing her hands, she walked slowly,
sorrowfully toward the castle.

The workmen now fled in terror from the court, while Bertalda with her
maids still gazed from her window at the pale shadowy figure. As it
passed beneath her window it looked upward, sobbing pitifully, and
the bride saw under the veil the sweet sad face of the mistress of the
castle, Undine.

Bertalda called aloud to her maids to go fetch the knight, her
husband, but not one was found with courage to go in search of him.

On and on went the wanderer slowly, as though she would fain turn
backward, on and up the stairs she knew so well, through the long
quiet passages, and as she walked her tears fell yet more fast.

In a room at the end of the long passages stood the knight. A torch
burnt dully by his side. As he stood there thinking of the days that
had passed away for ever, he heard steps coming slowly along the
passage. He listened, and, as he listened, the slow footsteps halted
outside his door.

Soft fingers tapped, and then very gently the door was opened, and
Huldbrand, standing before a long mirror, saw, without turning, a
white-veiled figure enter and close the door.

'The stone has been taken away from the fountain, and I have come to
you and you must die,' said a soft voice.

Ah, it was Undine, his beautiful lost Undine, who had come back to
him. How he longed to see her face, yet how he feared to have the veil
removed lest she should have changed since last he gazed upon her.

[Illustration: Slowly, slowly there rose out of the mouth of the well
a white figure]

'If you are beauteous as in days gone by, if in your eyes I may see
your soul tender as of old, draw aside your veil, that as I die I may
gaze upon you,' faltered the knight.

Silently Undine threw back her veil, and Huldbrand saw her, fair as on
the day he had won her for his bride. As he looked upon her, he knew
that he had never loved any one in all the wide world as he loved
Undine.

He bent toward the sweet face. Then Undine, kissing the knight, drew
him into her arms and wept. And as she wept the tears flowed into his
very heart and he also wept. Softly she laid him on his couch, and
with her arms around him, Huldbrand died.

Then sorrowfully Undine raised herself from the couch, and sorrowfully
she passed from the chamber.

'My tears fell on his heart until, for very sorrow, it broke,' she
said, as she glided, a pale veiled figure, through the terrified
servants.

And some who dared to follow her saw that she went slowly down toward
the fountain.




CHAPTER XVII

THE BURIAL


Now when Father Heilman heard that the knight was dead, he hastened to
the castle to comfort Bertalda. The priest, who but the day before had
married the maiden to the knight, had already fled from the haunted
house.

But Father Heilman found that the haughty spirit of the bride needed
no comfort. She was more angry with Undine than sorrowful that she had
lost the knight. Indeed, as she thought of the strange way in which
Huldbrand had been snatched away from her, she cried aloud, 'Why did
Huldbrand bring a water spirit to his home? She is worse than a
mermaiden, she is a witch, a sorceress!'

Then the old fisherman, who heard her cruel words, hushed her, saying,
'It was God's will that Huldbrand should die, and Undine alone,
forsaken, weeps for his death in great sorrow of soul.'

But if Father Heilman was not needed to comfort Bertalda, his presence
was wanted at the burial of the knight.

Not far off there was a little village church to which the lord of
Ringstetten and others of his race had given gifts. It was arranged
that in the churchyard the knight should be laid to rest.

His shield and helmet were laid on his coffin and would be buried with
him, for the knight of Ringstetten had left no son to bear them in the
years that were to come.

On the day that had been fixed the mourners walked slowly toward the
churchyard, Father Heilman in front carrying a crucifix.

Then slowly a figure clad in snow-white garments, and wringing her
hands in great sorrow, came to join the mourners, who all wore black
clothes as a sign of their grief. Those who noticed the white-veiled
figure drew closer together, terror-stricken. Others, seeing them thus
fearful, turned to see the reason of their fear, and soon these too
drew aside, for the white-robed figure was in their very midst.

Seeing the confusion among the mourners, some soldiers, trying to be
brave, as was their duty, spoke to the white-robed figure and even
tried to drive her away. But she glided quickly past them and followed
onward, still toward the little church.

The maids who were walking close to Bertalda saw that the white-veiled
figure would soon be by their side, and they, lest she should harm
them, drew back, so that it was easy for the shadowy form to keep
close to the new-made bride.

Softly, noiselessly she moved, so noiselessly that Bertalda neither
heard nor saw the phantom figure.

At length the mourners reached the churchyard and gathered around the
grave. Then Bertalda, looking up, saw the white-veiled figure standing
by her side, and knew that it was Undine.

Fear whispered to Bertalda to leave the veiled figure undisturbed,
anger bade Bertalda order that it should at once depart. And anger was
going to have its way, for Bertalda opened her lips to speak, but
Undine shook her head and held out her hands as though she begged for
mercy.

Then Bertalda remembered all the kindness Undine had shown toward her,
and especially how lovingly she had held out to her the coral
necklace as they were sailing on the Danube, and as she remembered her
hard heart melted, and she wept.

At that moment Father Heilman began to pray, and all the mourners
knelt around the grave, in which the coffin bearing the shield and
helmet of the knight had now been placed.

When the prayer was ended the company arose, but the white-veiled
figure was no longer to be seen.

Only on the spot where she had knelt a stream of crystal water gushed
out of the earth. Quietly it flowed around the grave of the knight and
then onward until it joined the river which ran past the little
village church.

And in days to come the villagers would ofttimes point to the crystal
stream as they told their children in solemn whispers that it, the
little crystal stream, was none other than Undine, poor forsaken
Undine, who thus surrounded and protected Huldbrand, her beloved.

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Undine, by Friedrich de la Motte Fouquée

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNDINE ***

***** This file should be named 18752-8.txt or 18752-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/7/5/18752/

Produced by Jason Isbell, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
